System X (computing) - Wikipedia System X (computing) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Big Mac (supercomputer)) Jump to navigation Jump to search This article is about the supercomputer. For the IBM product line, see IBM System x. Xserve cluster System X at Virginia Tech. System X (pronounced "System Ten") was a supercomputer assembled by Virginia Tech's Advanced Research Computing facility in the summer of 2003. Costing US$5.2 million,[1] it was originally composed of 1,100 Apple Power Mac G5 computers[2] with dual 2.0 GHz processors.[1] System X was decommissioned on May 21, 2012.[3] System X ran at 12.25 Teraflops, (20.24 peak), and was ranked #3 on November 16, 2003 [4] and #280 in the July 2008 edition of the TOP500 list of the world's most powerful supercomputers.[5] The system used error-correcting RAM, which is important for accuracy due to the rate of bits flipped by cosmic rays or other interference sources in its vast number of RAM chips. Contents 1 Background 2 Upgrade to Server-Grade Parts 3 Similar Projects 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Background[edit] The supercomputer's name originates from the use of the Mac OS X operating system for each node, and because it was the first university computer to achieve 10 teraflops on the high performance LINPACK benchmark. The supercomputer is also known as Big Mac or Terascale Cluster. In 2003 it was also touted as "the world's most powerful and cheapest homebuilt supercomputer."[1] System X was constructed with a relatively low budget of just $5.2 million, in the span of only three months, thanks in large part to using off-the-shelf Power Mac G5 computers. By comparison, the Earth Simulator, the fastest supercomputer at the time, cost approximately $400 million to build. Upgrade to Server-Grade Parts[edit] In 2004, Virginia Tech upgraded its computer to Apple's newly released, Xserve G5 servers. The upgraded version ranked #7 in the 2004 TOP500 list and its server-grade error-correcting memory solved the problem of cosmic ray interference. In October 2004, Virginia Tech partially rebuilt System X at a cost of about $600,000. These improvements brought the computer's speed up to 12.25 Teraflops, which placed System X #14 on the 2005 TOP500 list. Similar Projects[edit] Virginia Tech's system was the model for Xseed, a smaller system also made from Xserve servers and built by Bowie State University in Maryland. Xseed was ranked #166 in the 2005 TOP500. System G has 324 Mac Pros (2592 processor cores) with QDR InfiniBand in Virginia Tech's Center for High-End Computing Systems. See also[edit] History of supercomputing References[edit] ^ a b c "System X History". Advanced Research Computing section of Virginia Tech website. Virginia Tech. Archived from the original on 2 July 2013. Retrieved 18 May 2014.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) ^ Varadarajan, S. System X: building the Virginia Tech supercomputer in Proceedings. 13th International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks, 2004. ICCCN 2004. ISBN 0-7803-8814-3 ^ "System X (Linux/OS X): ARC HPC Resources". Virginia Tech. 2012-05-21. Archived from the original on 2015-02-03. Retrieved 2014-05-18.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) ^ "Lists | TOP500 Supercomputer Sites". TOP500. Retrieved 2014-05-18. ^ "System X - 1100 Dual 2.3 GHz Apple XServe/Mellanox Infiniband 4X/Cisco GigE | TOP500 Supercomputer Sites". TOP500. Retrieved 2014-05-18. External links[edit] Virginia Tech - System X (via Internet Archive) CHECS Computing Resources: Experimental Facilities - System G, Production Computing Facilities - System X (via Internet Archive) Virginia Tech - Advanced Research Computing TOP500 website Film about System X, YouTube v t e Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Located in: Blacksburg, Virginia Academics College of Agriculture and Life Sciences College of Architecture and Urban Studies Pamplin College of Business College of Engineering College of Liberal Arts and Human Sciences Carilion School of Medicine and Research Institute School of Public and International Affairs School of Biomedical Engineering & Sciences College of Natural Resources and Environment College of Osteopathic Medicine College of Science College of Veterinary Medicine Research Virginia Tech Corporate Research Center Virginia Tech Foundation Biocomplexity Institute Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute Virginia Cooperative Extension Virginia Tech Institute for Policy and Governance System X System G Virginia Smart Road eCorridors Program e-58 Stability Wind Tunnel PATH Virginia school of political economy VLA DARwIn-OP Nanoknife Carilion Roanoke Memorial Hospital LibX Mid Atlantic Terascale Partnership VTLS Blacksburg Electronic Village Pelikan tail Virginia School Leaders Institute NIA Super Dual Auroral Radar Network eTBLAST Head impact telemetry system Metal rubber NEXTOR Sugar battery Virginia Cyber Range Athletics Atlantic Coast Conference Fighting Gobblers HokieBird Old Hokie Tech Triumph UVA–VT rivalry BC–VT rivalry RU–VT rivalry Football Commonwealth Cup Black Diamond Trophy Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's basketball Women's basketball Baseball Virginia Tech IMG Sports Network Lane Stadium Cassell Coliseum English Field Berglund Center Collegiate Water Polo Association Thompson Field Campus Virginia Tech National Capital Region Washington-Alexandria Architecture Center Virginia Tech Richmond Center Hotel Roanoke Hillcrest Honors Community Preston and Olin Institute Reynolds Homestead BCB Airport Life Collegiate Times Virginia Tech Corps of Cadets Highty-Tighties The Marching Virginians The New Virginians Virginia Tech Rescue Squad The Educational Media Company at Virginia Tech United States v. Morrison WUVT-FM WVTF HEVT WBRW Early Music Ensemble at Virginia Tech Tech Talk Live Radio IQ Index of Middle English Verse Hahn Horticulture Garden Hokie Stone Graduating Peter New River Valley History Virginia Tech shooting (Seung-Hui Cho {shooter}) Stroubles Creek Blacksburg Transit Valley Metro Police Department People List of Virginia Tech alumni List of Virginia Tech Presidents List of Virginia Tech head football coaches Commencement speakers Founded: 1872 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=System_X_(computing)&oldid=973860283" Categories: One-of-a-kind computers Supercomputers Virginia Tech Hidden categories: CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Deutsch Italiano Edit links This page was last edited on 19 August 2020, at 17:10 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement