CORAL - Wikipedia CORAL From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from CORAL66) Jump to navigation Jump to search Coral 66 Paradigms procedural, imperative, structured Family ALGOL Designed by Philip Woodward, I. F. Currie, M. Griffiths Developer Royal Radar Establishment First appeared 1964; 56 years ago (1964) Typing discipline Static, strong Scope Lexical Implementation language BCPL Platform CTL Modular-1, DEC Alpha, GEC, Ferranti, Honeywell, HPE Integrity Servers, Interdata 8/32, PDP-11, SPARC, VAX, x86 OS VAX/VMS; BSD Unix, Linux, Solaris Influenced by ALGOL, JOVIAL, Fortran CORAL, short for Computer On-line Real-time Applications Language is a programming language originally developed in 1964 at the Royal Radar Establishment (RRE), Malvern, Worcestershire, United Kingdom (UK).[1] The R was originally for "radar", not "real-time".[2] It was influenced primarily by JOVIAL, and thus ALGOL, but is not a subset of either. The most widely-known version, CORAL 66 was subsequently developed by I. F. Currie and M. Griffiths under the auspices of the Inter-Establishment Committee for Computer Applications (IECCA). Its official definition, edited by Woodward, Wetherall, and Gorman, was first published in 1970.[3] In 1971, CORAL was selected by the Ministry of Defense as the language for future military applications. To support this, a standardization program was introduced to ensure CORAL compilers met the specifications. This process was later adopted by the US Department of Defense while defining Ada. Overview[edit] Coral 66 is a general-purpose programming language based on ALGOL 60, with some features from Coral 64, JOVIAL, and Fortran. It includes structured record types (as in Pascal) and supports the packing of data into limited storage (also as in Pascal). Like Edinburgh IMP it allows inline (embedded) assembly language, and also offers good runtime checking and diagnostics. It is designed for real-time computing and embedded system applications, and for use on computers with limited processing power, including those limited to fixed-point arithmetic and those without support for dynamic storage allocation. The language was an inter-service standard for British military programming, and was also widely adopted for civil purposes in the British control and automation industry. It was used to write software for both the Ferranti[4] and General Electric Company (GEC) computers from 1971 onwards. Implementations also exist for the Interdata 8/32, PDP-11, VAX, Alpha platforms and HPE Integrity Servers; for the Honeywell, and for the Computer Technology Limited (CTL, later ITL) Modular-1;[5] and for SPARC running Solaris, and Intel running Linux. Queen Elizabeth II sent the first email from a head of state from the Royal Signals and Radar Establishment over the ARPANET on March 26, 1976. The message read “This message to all ARPANET users announces the availability on ARPANET of the Coral 66 compiler provided by the GEC 4080 computer at the Royal Signals and Radar Establishment, Malvern, England, ... Coral 66 is the standard real-time high level language adopted by the Ministry of Defence."[6][7] A variant of Coral 66 was developed during the late 1970s to early 1980s by the British General Post Office (GPO), together with GEC, STC and Plessey, for use on the System X digital telephone exchange control computers, named PO-CORAL. This was later renamed BT-CORAL when British Telecom was spun off from the Post Office. Unique features of this language were the focus on real-time execution, message processing, limits on statement execution between waiting for input, and a prohibition on recursion to remove the need for a stack. As Coral was aimed at a variety of real-time work, rather than general office DP, there was no standardised equivalent to a stdio library. IECCA recommended a primitive input/output (I/O) package to accompany any compiler (in a document titled Input/Output of Character data in Coral 66 Utility Programs). Most implementers avoided this by producing Coral interfaces to extant Fortran and, later, C libraries. CORAL's most significant contribution to computing may have been enforcing quality control in commercial compilers.[5] To have a CORAL compiler approved by IECCA, and thus allowing a compiler to be marketed as a CORAL 66 compiler, the candidate compiler had to compile and execute an official suite of 25 test programs and 6 benchmark programs. The process was part of the British Standard (BS) 5905 approval process. This methodology was observed and adapted later by the United States Department of Defense for the official certification of Ada compilers. Source code for a Coral 66 compiler (written in BCPL) has been recovered and the Official Definition of Coral 66 document by Her Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO) has been scanned; the Ministry of Defence patent office has issued a licence to the Edinburgh Computer History project to allow them to put both the code and the language reference online for non-commercial use. References[edit] ^ FM1600B Microcircuit Computer Ferranti Digital Systems (PDF). Bracknell, Berkshire, UK: Ferranti Limited, Digital Systems Department. October 1968 [September 1968]. List DSD 68/6. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 May 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2020. ^ Gough, Jack (1993). Watching the skies: a history of ground radar for the air defence of the United Kingdom by the Royal Air Force from 1946 to 1975. HMSO. p. 264. ISBN 978-0-11-772723-6. ^ Woodward, Philip M. (1970). Official Definition of CORAL 66. Her Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO). pp. vii+58. ISBN 0-11-470221-7. ^ Gorman, B (June 1978). The Coral 66 Compiler for Ferranti ARGUS 500 Computer (Report). Royal Signals and Radar Establishment. Technical Note 799. Retrieved 17 January 2018. ^ a b "Lucid language may help European computers". New Scientist. 30 November 1972. p. 513. Retrieved 8 April 2019. ^ Metz, Cade (25 December 2012). "How the Queen of England Beat Everyone to the Internet". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 9 January 2020. ^ Left, Sarah (13 March 2002). "Email timeline". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 9 January 2020. External links[edit] CORAL 66 test program extracted from the Test Responder report CORAL 66 benchmarks OpenVMS CORAL 66 compiler for HPE Integrity servers, Alpha (AXP) and VAX machines (commercial working CORAL 66 system) BS5905 CORAL 66 Standard DEF STAN 05-47 PDP-11 CORAL/ASM interfacing library ECCE editor script to translate CORAL 66 into Edinburgh IMP v t e ALGOL programming Implementations Technical standards ALGOL 58 ALGOL 60 ALGOL 68 Dialects ABC ALGOL ALCOR ALGO ALGOL 68C ALGOL 68-R ALGOL 68RS ALGOL 68S ALGOL N ALGOL W ALGOL X Atlas Autocode (Edinburgh IMP) Burroughs ALGOL Coral 66 Dartmouth ALGOL 30 DASK ALGOL DG/L Elliott ALGOL Executive Systems Problem Oriented Language (ESPOL) FLACC IMP JOVIAL Kidsgrove Algol Mary NELIAC RTL/2 S-algol, PS-algol, Napier88 Simula Small Machine ALGOL Like Language (SMALL) SMIL ALGOL Formalisms Jensen's Device Van Wijngaarden grammar Community Organizations Professional associations ALCOR Group Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) BSI Group Euro-Asian Council for Standardization, Metrology and Certification (EASC) International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) IFIP Working Group 2.1 Society of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics (GAMM) Business Burroughs Corporation Elliott Brothers Regnecentralen Education Case Institute of Technology University of Edinburgh University of St Andrews Manchester University Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Government Royal Radar Establishment (RRE) People ALGOL 58 John Backus Friedrich L. Bauer Hermann Bottenbruch Charles Katz Alan Perlis Heinz Rutishauser Klaus Samelson Joseph Henry Wegstein ALGOL 60 Backus+ Roland Carl Backhouse Bauer+ Richard Bird Stephen R. Bourne Edsger W. Dijkstra Andrey Ershov Robert W. Floyd Jeremy Gibbons Julien Green David Gries Eric Hehner Tony Hoare Jørn Jensen Katz+ Peter Landin Tom Maibaum Conor McBride John McCarthy Carroll Morgan Peter Naur Maurice Nivat John E. L. Peck Perlis+ Brian Randell Rutishauser Samelson+ Jacob T. Schwartz Micha Sharir David Turner Bernard Vauquois Eiiti Wada Wegstein+ Adriaan van Wijngaarden Mike Woodger + = full name and link in prior ALGOL version above Simula Ole-Johan Dahl Kristen Nygaard ALGOL 68 Bauer+ Susan G. Bond Bourne+ Robert Dewar Dijkstra+ Gerhard Goos Michael Guy Hoare+ Cornelis H. A. Koster Peter Landin Charles H. Lindsey Barry J. Mailloux McCarthy+ Lambert Meertens Naur+ Peck+ Willem van der Poel Randell+ Douglas T. Ross Samelson+ Michel Sintzoff van Wijngaarden+ Niklaus Wirth Woodger+ Philip Woodward Nobuo Yoneda + = full name and link in prior ALGOL version above Hal Abelson John Barnes Tony Brooker Ron Morrison Peter O'Hearn John C. Reynolds Other ALGOL Bulletin Category Category Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CORAL&oldid=987557619" Categories: History of computing in the United Kingdom Malvern, Worcestershire Procedural programming languages Programming languages created in 1964 Science and technology in Worcestershire Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from September 2019 Use British English from September 2019 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Español Português Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2020, at 20:35 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement