Recursive set - Wikipedia Recursive set From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search In computability theory, a set of natural numbers is called recursive, computable or decidable if there is an algorithm which takes a number as input, terminates after a finite amount of time (possibly depending on the given number) and correctly decides whether the number belongs to the set or not. A set which is not computable is called noncomputable or undecidable. A more general class of sets than the decidable ones consists of the recursively enumerable sets, also called semidecidable sets. For these sets, it is only required that there is an algorithm that correctly decides when a number is in the set; the algorithm may give no answer (but not the wrong answer) for numbers not in the set. Contents 1 Formal definition 2 Examples and non-examples 3 Properties 4 References 5 External links Formal definition[edit] A subset S of the natural numbers is called recursive if there exists a total computable function f such that f(x) = 1 if x∈S and f(x) = 0 if x∉S. In other words, the set S is recursive if and only if the indicator function 1S is computable. Examples and non-examples[edit] Examples: Every finite or cofinite subset of the natural numbers is computable. This includes these special cases: The empty set is computable. The entire set of natural numbers is computable. Each natural number (as defined in standard set theory) is computable; that is, the set of natural numbers less than a given natural number is computable. The set of prime numbers is computable. A recursive language is a recursive subset of a formal language. The set of Gödel numbers of arithmetic proofs described in Kurt Gödel's paper "On formally undecidable propositions of Principia Mathematica and related systems I" is computable; see Gödel's incompleteness theorems. Non-examples: Main article: List of undecidable problems The set of Turing machines that halt is not computable. The isomorphism class of two finite simplicial complexes is not computable. The set of busy beaver champions is not computable. Properties[edit] If A is a recursive set then the complement of A is a recursive set. If A and B are recursive sets then A ∩ B, A ∪ B and the image of A × B under the Cantor pairing function are recursive sets. A set A is a recursive set if and only if A and the complement of A are both recursively enumerable sets. The preimage of a recursive set under a total computable function is a recursive set. The image of a computable set under a total computable bijection is computable. A set is recursive if and only if it is at level Δ0 1 of the arithmetical hierarchy. A set is recursive if and only if it is either the range of a nondecreasing total computable function or the empty set. The image of a computable set under a nondecreasing total computable function is computable. References[edit] Cutland, N. Computability. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge-New York, 1980. ISBN 0-521-22384-9; ISBN 0-521-29465-7 Rogers, H. The Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Computability, MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-68052-1; ISBN 0-07-053522-1 Soare, R. Recursively enumerable sets and degrees. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1987. ISBN 3-540-15299-7 External links[edit] Sakharov, Alex. "Recursive Set". MathWorld. v t e Mathematical logic General Formal language Formation rule Formal proof Formal semantics Well-formed formula Set Element Class Classical logic Axiom Rule of inference Relation Theorem Logical consequence Type theory Symbol Syntax Theory Systems Formal system Deductive system Axiomatic system Hilbert style systems Natural deduction Sequent calculus Traditional logic Proposition Inference Argument Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional calculus and Boolean logic Boolean functions Propositional calculus Propositional formula Logical connectives Truth tables Many-valued logic Predicate logic First-order Quantifiers Predicate Second-order Monadic predicate calculus Naive set theory Set Empty set Element Enumeration Extensionality Finite set Infinite set Subset Power set Countable set Uncountable set Recursive set Domain Codomain Image Map Function Relation Ordered pair Set theory Foundations of mathematics Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory Axiom of choice General set theory Kripke–Platek set theory Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory Morse–Kelley set theory Tarski–Grothendieck set theory Model theory Model Interpretation Non-standard model Finite model theory Truth value Validity Proof theory Formal proof Deductive system Formal system Theorem Logical consequence Rule of inference Syntax Computability theory Recursion Recursive set Recursively enumerable set Decision problem Church–Turing thesis Computable function Primitive recursive function v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Intersection Power set Set difference Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Cardinality Cardinal number (large) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Countable Empty Finite (hereditarily) Fuzzy Infinite (Dedekind-infinite) Recursive Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Abraham Fraenkel Bertrand Russell Ernst Zermelo Georg Cantor John von Neumann Kurt Gödel Paul Bernays Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Thomas Jech Thoralf Skolem Willard Quine Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Recursive_set&oldid=961836415" Categories: Computability theory Theory of computation Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 10 June 2020, at 17:28 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement