Desktop environment - Wikipedia Desktop environment From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search graphical user interface This article is about the operating system and user interface schema. For desktop computing in general, see desktop computer. In computing, a desktop environment (DE) is an implementation of the desktop metaphor made of a bundle of programs running on top of a computer operating system that share a common graphical user interface (GUI), sometimes described as a graphical shell. The desktop environment was seen mostly on personal computers until the rise of mobile computing. Desktop GUIs help the user to easily access and edit files, while they usually do not provide access to all of the features found in the underlying operating system. Instead, the traditional command-line interface (CLI) is still used when full control over the operating system is required. A desktop environment typically consists of icons, windows, toolbars, folders, wallpapers and desktop widgets (see Elements of graphical user interfaces and WIMP). A GUI might also provide drag and drop functionality and other features that make the desktop metaphor more complete. A desktop environment aims to be an intuitive way for the user to interact with the computer using concepts which are similar to those used when interacting with the physical world, such as buttons and windows. While the term desktop environment originally described a style of user interfaces following the desktop metaphor, it has also come to describe the programs that realize the metaphor itself.[1] This usage has been popularized by projects such as the Common Desktop Environment, K Desktop Environment, and GNOME. Contents 1 Implementation 2 History and common use 3 Desktop environments for the X Window System 4 Examples of desktop environments 4.1 Gallery 5 See also 6 References Implementation[edit] On a system that offers a desktop environment, a window manager in conjunction with applications written using a widget toolkit are generally responsible for most of what the user sees. The window manager supports the user interactions with the environment, while the toolkit provides developers a software library for applications with a unified look and behavior. A windowing system of some sort generally interfaces directly with the underlying operating system and libraries. This provides support for graphical hardware, pointing devices, and keyboards. The window manager generally runs on top of this windowing system. While the windowing system may provide some window management functionality, this functionality is still considered to be part of the window manager, which simply happens to have been provided by the windowing system. Applications that are created with a particular window manager in mind usually make use of a windowing toolkit, generally provided with the operating system or window manager. A windowing toolkit gives applications access to widgets that allow the user to interact graphically with the application in a consistent way. History and common use[edit] Further information: History of the graphical user interface The interim Dynabook desktop environment (1976; aka Smalltalk-76 running on Alto) The first desktop environment was created by Xerox and was sold with the Xerox Alto in the 1970s. The Alto was generally considered by Xerox to be a personal office computer; it failed in the marketplace because of poor marketing and a very high price tag.[dubious – discuss][2] With the Lisa, Apple introduced a desktop environment on an affordable personal computer, which also failed in the market. The desktop metaphor was popularized on commercial personal computers by the original Macintosh from Apple in 1984, and was popularized further by Windows from Microsoft since the 1990s. As of 2014[update], the most popular desktop environments are descendants of these earlier environments, including the Aero environment used in Windows Vista and Windows 7, and the Aqua environment used in macOS. When compared with the X-based desktop environments available for Unix-like operating systems such as Linux and FreeBSD, the proprietary desktop environments included with Windows and macOS have relatively fixed layouts and static features, with highly integrated "seamless" designs that aim to provide mostly consistent customer experiences across installations. Microsoft Windows dominates in marketshare among personal computers with a desktop environment. Computers using Unix-like operating systems such as macOS, Chrome OS, Linux, BSD or Solaris are much less common;[3] however, as of 2015[update] there is a growing market for low-cost Linux PCs using the X Window System or Wayland with a broad choice of desktop environments. Among the more popular of these are Google's Chromebooks and Chromeboxes, Intel's NUC, the Raspberry Pi, etc.[citation needed] On tablets and smartphones, the situation is the opposite, with Unix-like operating systems dominating the market, including the iOS (BSD-derived), Android, Tizen, Sailfish and Ubuntu (all Linux-derived). Microsoft's Windows phone, Windows RT and Windows 10 are used on a much smaller number of tablets and smartphones. However, the majority of Unix-like operating systems dominant on handheld devices do not use the X11 desktop environments used by other Unix-like operating systems, relying instead on interfaces based on other technologies. Desktop environments for the X Window System[edit] A brief timeline of the most popular modern desktop environments for Unix-like operating systems (greyscale logos indicate when the project's development started, while colorized logos indicate the project's first release) Further information: Comparison of X Window System desktop environments On systems running the X Window System (typically Unix-family systems such as Linux, the BSDs, and formal UNIX distributions), desktop environments are much more dynamic and customizable to meet user needs. In this context, a desktop environment typically consists of several separate components, including a window manager (such as Mutter or KWin), a file manager (such as Files or Dolphin), a set of graphical themes, together with toolkits (such as GTK+ and Qt) and libraries for managing the desktop. All these individual modules can be exchanged and independently configured to suit users, but most desktop environments provide a default configuration that works with minimal user setup. Some window managers‍—‌such as IceWM, Fluxbox, Openbox, ROX Desktop and Window Maker‍—‌contain relatively sparse desktop environment elements, such as an integrated spatial file manager, while others like evilwm and wmii do not provide such elements. Not all of the program code that is part of a desktop environment has effects which are directly visible to the user. Some of it may be low-level code. KDE, for example, provides so-called KIO slaves which give the user access to a wide range of virtual devices. These I/O slaves are not available outside the KDE environment. In 1996 the KDE was announced, followed in 1997 by the announcement of GNOME. Xfce is a smaller project that was also founded in 1996,[4] and focuses on speed and modularity, just like LXDE which was started in 2006. A comparison of X Window System desktop environments demonstrates the differences between environments. GNOME and KDE were usually seen as dominant solutions, and these are still often installed by default on Linux systems. Each of them offers: To programmers, a set of standard APIs, a programming environment, and human interface guidelines. To translators, a collaboration infrastructure. KDE and GNOME are available in many languages.[5][6] To artists, a workspace to share their talents.[7][8] To ergonomics specialists, the chance to help simplify the working environment.[9][10][11] To developers of third-party applications, a reference environment for integration. OpenOffice.org is one such application.[12][13] To users, a complete desktop environment and a suite of essential applications. These include a file manager, web browser, multimedia player, email client, address book, PDF reader, photo manager, and system preferences application. In the early 2000s, KDE reached maturity.[14] The Appeal[15] and ToPaZ[16] projects focused on bringing new advances to the next major releases of both KDE and GNOME respectively. Although striving for broadly similar goals, GNOME and KDE do differ in their approach to user ergonomics. KDE encourages applications to integrate and interoperate, is highly customizable, and contains many complex features, all whilst trying to establish sensible defaults. GNOME on the other hand is more prescriptive, and focuses on the finer details of essential tasks and overall simplification. Accordingly, each one attracts a different user and developer community. Technically, there are numerous technologies common to all Unix-like desktop environments, most obviously the X Window System. Accordingly, the freedesktop.org project was established as an informal collaboration zone with the goal being to reduce duplication of effort. As GNOME and KDE focus on high-performance computers, users of less powerful or older computers often prefer alternative desktop environments specifically created for low-performance systems. Most commonly used lightweight desktop environments include LXDE and Xfce; they both use GTK+, which is the same underlying toolkit GNOME uses. The MATE desktop environment, a fork of GNOME 2, is comparable to Xfce in its use of RAM and processor cycles, but is often considered more as an alternative to other lightweight desktop environments. For a while, GNOME and KDE enjoyed the status of the most popular Linux desktop environments; later, other desktop environments grew in popularity. In April 2011, GNOME introduced a new interface concept with its version 3, while a popular Linux distribution Ubuntu introduced its own new desktop environment, Unity. Some users preferred to keep the traditional interface concept of GNOME 2, resulting in the creation of MATE as a GNOME 2 fork.[17] Examples of desktop environments[edit] The most common desktop environment on personal computers is Microsoft Windows' built-in interface. It was titled Luna in Windows XP, Aero in Windows Vista and Windows 7, Metro in Windows 8 and 8.1, and Fluent in Windows 10. Also common is Aqua, included with Apple's macOS. Mainstream desktop environments for Unix-like operating systems use the X Window System, and include KDE, GNOME, Xfce, and LXDE, any of which may be selected by users and are not tied exclusively to the operating system in use. A number of other desktop environments also exist, including (but not limited to) CDE, EDE, GEM, IRIX Interactive Desktop, Sun's Java Desktop System, Jesktop, Mezzo, Project Looking Glass, ROX Desktop, UDE, Xito, XFast. Moreover, there exists FVWM-Crystal, which consists of a powerful configuration for the FVWM window manager, a theme and further adds, altogether forming a "construction kit" for building up a desktop environment. X window managers that are meant to be usable stand-alone — without another desktop environment — also include elements reminiscent of those found in typical desktop environments, most prominently Enlightenment.[citation needed] Other examples include OpenBox, Fluxbox, WindowLab, Fvwm, as well as Window Maker and AfterStep, which both feature the NeXTSTEP GUI look and feel. However newer versions of some operating systems make self configure. The Amiga approach to desktop environment was noteworthy: the original Workbench desktop environment in AmigaOS evolved through time to originate an entire family of descendants and alternative desktop solutions. Some of those descendants are the Scalos,[18] the Ambient desktop of MorphOS, and the Wanderer desktop of the AROS open source OS. WindowLab also contains features reminiscent of the Amiga UI. Third-party Directory Opus software, which was originally just a navigational file manager program, evolved to become a complete Amiga desktop replacement called Directory Opus Magellan. OS/2 (and derivatives such as eComStation and ArcaOS) use the Workplace Shell. Earlier versions of OS/2 used the Presentation Manager. The BumpTop project was an experimental desktop environment. Its main objective is to replace the 2D paradigm with a "real-world" 3D implementation, where documents can be freely manipulated across a virtual table. Gallery[edit] See also: History of the graphical user interface Ambient Budgie CDE Cinnamon Deepin DE EDE Elokab Enlightenment Étoilé GNOME Shell GNUstep Innova KDE Plasma 5 Liri Shell Lumina LXDE LXQt MATE MaXX Maynard Mezzo Moksha Pantheon Project Looking Glass Razor-qt ROX Desktop SwayWM Sugar theShell Trinity twm Unity vera Window Maker Weston Xfce Zorin OS See also[edit] Wayland – an alternative to X Windows which can run several different desktop environments References[edit] ^ "Window managers and desktop environments – Linux 101". clemsonlinux.org. Archived from the original on 2008-07-04. ^ Lineback, Nathan. "The Xerox Alto". Toastytech.com. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ "Operating System Market Share". Marketshare.hitslink.com. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ Then, Ewdison (6 February 2009), Xfce creator talks Linux, Moblin, netbooks and open-source, SlashGear, retrieved 5 February 2011 ^ "KDE Localization". L10n.kde.org. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ "GNOME Internationalization". Gnome.org. 2011-10-23. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ Link 27 Dec Personalized Golf Ball Sign» (2011-12-27). "Where life imitates art". KDE-Artists. Archived from the original on 2012-02-07. Retrieved 2012-02-04.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ "GNOME Art: Artwork and Themes". Art.gnome.org. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ "OpenUsability". OpenUsability. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ GNOME Human Interface Guidelines Archived February 1, 2004, at the Wayback Machine ^ KDE User Interface Guidelines Archived January 6, 2004, at the Wayback Machine ^ "KDE OpenOffice.org". KDE OpenOffice.org. Archived from the original on 2010-07-13. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ "GNOME OpenOffice.org". Gnome.org. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ "Linux Usability Report v1.01" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-19. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ "Appeal". KDE. Archived from the original on 2007-01-06. ^ "GNOME 3.0". GNOME wiki. Retrieved 2012-02-04. ^ Thorsten Leemhuis (usinglinux1173.blogspot.com), August 5, 2012: Comment: Desktop Fragmentation ^ Chris Haynes. "Scalos – The Amiga Desktop Replacement". Scalos.noname.fr. Retrieved 2012-02-04.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) v t e Desktop environments and window managers based on X11 or Wayland Desktop environments (comparison) GTK-based Budgie Cinnamon GNOME GPE LXDE MATE ROX Desktop Sugar Xfce Qt-based Deepin KDE Plasma Lumina LXQt (Razor-qt perpetuated) OPIE Trinity Motif-based CDE DECwindows IRIX Interactive Desktop VUE Other EDE (FLTK-based) Étoilé (GNUstep-based) Mezzo OpenWindows (OLIT-based) UDE (Xlib/XCB-based) Enlightenment (EFL-based) Graphical shells Deepin GNOME Shell KDE Plasma 4 KDE Plasma 5 Maynard Unity X window managers (comparison) Compositing Compiz KWin Metacity Muffin Mutter Xfwm Enlightenment Stacking 4Dwm 9wm AfterStep amiwm Blackbox CTWM cwm Fluxbox FLWM FVWM IceWM JWM Matchbox Motif Window Manager olwm Openbox Qvwm Sawfish swm twm tvtwm vtwm Window Maker WindowLab wm2 Tiling awesome dwm i3 Ion larswm ratpoison StumpWM wmii xmonad Wayland compositors Enlightenment Gala KWin Mir Mutter Muffin Budgie-wm sway Weston Related Display server GUI GUI widget Painter's algorithm Resolution independence Shell Virtual desktop Widget toolkit WIMP Windowing system v t e Operating systems General Advocacy Comparison Forensic engineering History Hobbyist development List Timeline Usage share Variants Disk operating system Distributed operating system Embedded operating system Mobile operating system Network operating system Object-oriented operating system Real-time operating system Supercomputer operating system Kernel Architectures Exokernel Hybrid Microkernel Monolithic vkernel Rump kernel Unikernel Components Device driver Loadable kernel module Microkernel User space Process management Concepts Computer multitasking (Cooperative, Preemptive) Context switch Interrupt IPC Process Process control block Real-time Thread Time-sharing Scheduling algorithms Fixed-priority preemptive Multilevel feedback queue Round-robin Shortest job next Memory management, resource protection Bus error General protection fault Memory protection Paging Protection ring Segmentation fault Virtual memory Storage access, file systems Boot loader Defragmentation Device file File attribute Inode Journal Partition Virtual file system Virtual tape library Supporting concepts API Computer network HAL Live CD Live USB OS shell CLI GUI 3D GUI NUI TUI VUI ZUI PXE Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Desktop_environment&oldid=978509485" Categories: Desktop environments Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from October 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kurdî മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 15 September 2020, at 10:05 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement