Exploit (computer security) - Wikipedia Exploit (computer security) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Exploit (computer science)) Jump to navigation Jump to search Part of a series on Information security Related security categories Automotive security Cybercrime Cybersex trafficking Computer fraud Cyberwarfare Internet security Mobile security Network security Threats Advanced persistent threat Backdoor Computer crime Viruses Denial of service Eavesdropping Exploit Keyloggers Logic bombs Malware Payload Phishing Ransomware Rootkit Screen scrapers Spyware Trojan horse Vulnerability Web shells Web application security Worms SQL injection Defenses Computer access control Application security Antivirus software Secure coding Secure by default Secure by design Misuse case Security-focused operating system Authentication Multi-factor authentication Authorization Data-centric security Encryption Firewall Intrusion detection system Mobile secure gateway Runtime application self-protection v t e An exploit (from the English verb to exploit, meaning "to use something to one’s own advantage") is a piece of software, a chunk of data, or a sequence of commands that takes advantage of a bug or vulnerability to cause unintended or unanticipated behavior to occur on computer software, hardware, or something electronic (usually computerized). Such behavior frequently includes things like gaining control of a computer system, allowing privilege escalation, or a denial-of-service (DoS or related DDoS) attack. Contents 1 Classification 1.1 Types 1.2 Pivoting 2 See also 3 Notes 4 External links Classification[edit] There are several methods of classifying exploits. The most common is by how the exploit communicates to the vulnerable software. A remote exploit[1] works over a network and exploits the security vulnerability without any prior access to the vulnerable system. A local exploit[2] requires prior access to the vulnerable system and usually increases the privileges of the person running the exploit past those granted by the system administrator. Exploits against client applications also exist, usually consisting of modified servers that send an exploit if accessed with a client application. Exploits against client applications may also require some interaction with the user and thus may be used in combination with the social engineering method. Another classification is by the action against the vulnerable system; unauthorized data access, arbitrary code execution, and denial of service are examples. Many exploits are designed to provide superuser-level access to a computer system. However, it is also possible to use several exploits, first to gain low-level access, then to escalate privileges repeatedly until one reaches the highest administrative level (often called "root"). After an exploit is made known to the authors of the affected software, the vulnerability is often fixed through a patch and the exploit becomes unusable. That is the reason why some black hat hackers as well as military or intelligence agencies hackers do not publish their exploits but keep them private. Exploits unknown to everyone but the people that found and developed them are referred to as zero day exploits. Types[edit] Exploitations are commonly categorized and named[3][4] by the type of vulnerability they exploit (see vulnerabilities for a list), whether they are local/remote and the result of running the exploit (e.g. EoP, DoS, spoofing). Pivoting[edit] Pivoting refers to a method used by penetration testers that uses the compromised system to attack other systems on the same network to avoid restrictions such as firewall configurations, which may prohibit direct access to all machines. For example, if an attacker compromises a web server on a corporate network, the attacker can then use the compromised web server to attack other systems on the network. These types of attacks are often called multi-layered attacks. Pivoting is also known as island hopping. Pivoting can further be distinguished into proxy pivoting and VPN pivoting. Proxy pivoting generally describes the practice of channeling traffic through a compromised target using a proxy payload on the machine and launching attacks from the computer.[5] This type of pivoting is restricted to certain TCP and UDP ports that are supported by the proxy. VPN pivoting enables the attacker to create an encrypted layer to tunnel into the compromised machine to route any network traffic through that target machine, for example, to run a vulnerability scan on the internal network through the compromised machine, effectively giving the attacker full network access as if they were behind the firewall. Typically, the proxy or VPN applications enabling pivoting are executed on the target computer as the payload (software) of an exploit. Pivoting is usually done by infiltrating a part of a network infrastructure (as an example, a vulnerable printer or thermostat) and using a scanner to find other devices connected to attack them. By attacking a vulnerable piece of networking, an attacker could infect most or all of a network and gain complete control. See also[edit] Computer security Computer virus Crimeware Exploit kit Hacking: The Art of Exploitation (second edition) IT risk Metasploit Shellcode w3af Notes[edit] ^ "Remote Exploits - Exploit Database". www.exploit-db.com. ^ "Privilege Escalation and Local Exploits - Exploit Database". www.exploit-db.com. ^ "Exploits Database by Offensive Security". www.exploit-db.com. ^ "Exploit Database | Rapid7". www.rapid7.com. ^ "Metasploit Basics – Part 3: Pivoting and Interfaces". Digital Bond. External links[edit] Media related to Computer security exploits at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Exploit_(computer_security)&oldid=992531345" Categories: Computer security exploits Hidden categories: Commons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lumbaart Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 5 December 2020, at 19:29 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement