Fourth-generation programming language - Wikipedia Fourth-generation programming language From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fourth-generation language) Jump to navigation Jump to search Group of computer programming languages A fourth-generation programming language (4GL) is any computer programming language that belongs to a class of languages envisioned as an advancement upon third-generation programming languages (3GL). Each of the programming language generations aims to provide a higher level of abstraction of the internal computer hardware details, making the language more programmer-friendly, powerful, and versatile. While the definition of 4GL has changed over time, it can be typified by operating more with large collections of information at once rather than focusing on just bits and bytes. Languages claimed to be 4GL may include support for database management, report generation, mathematical optimization, GUI development, or web development. Some researchers state that 4GLs are a subset of domain-specific languages.[1][2] The concept of 4GL was developed from the 1970s through the 1990s, overlapping most of the development of 3GL, with 4GLs identified as "non-procedural" or "program-generating" languages, contrasted with 3GLs being algorithmic or procedural languages. While 3GLs like C, C++, C#, Java, and JavaScript remain popular for a wide variety of uses, 4GLs as originally defined found uses focused on databases, reports, and websites.[3] Some advanced 3GLs like Python, Ruby, and Perl combine some 4GL abilities within a general-purpose 3GL environment,[4] and libraries with 4GL-like features have been developed as add-ons for most popular 3GLs, producing languages that are a mix of 3GL and 4GL, blurring the distinction.[5] In the 1980s and 1990s, there were efforts to develop fifth-generation programming languages (5GL). Contents 1 History 2 Types 3 Low code environments 4 Examples 4.1 General use / versatile 4.2 Database query languages 4.3 Report generators 4.4 Data manipulation, analysis, and reporting languages 4.5 software creators 4.6 Mathematical optimization 4.7 Database-driven GUI application development 4.8 Low code / No code development platforms[12][13] 4.9 Screen painters and generators 4.10 Web development languages 5 See also 6 References History[edit] Though used earlier in papers and discussions, the term 4GL was first used formally by James Martin in his 1981 book Applications Development Without Programmers[6] to refer to non-procedural, high-level specification languages. In some primitive way, early 4GLs were included in the Informatics MARK-IV (1967) product and Sperry's MAPPER (1969 internal use, 1979 release). The motivations for the '4GL' inception and continued interest are several. The term can apply to a large set of software products. It can also apply to an approach that looks for greater semantic properties and implementation power. Just as the 3GL offered greater power to the programmer, so too did the 4GL open up the development environment to a wider population. The early input scheme for the 4GL supported entry of data within the 72-character limit of the punched card (8 bytes used for sequencing) where a card's tag would identify the type or function. With judicious use of a few cards, the 4GL deck could offer a wide variety of processing and reporting capability whereas the equivalent functionality coded in a 3GL could subsume, perhaps, a whole box or more of cards.[7] The 72-character format continued for a while as hardware progressed to larger memory and terminal interfaces. Even with its limitations, this approach supported highly sophisticated applications. As interfaces improved and allowed longer statement lengths and grammar-driven input handling, greater power ensued. An example of this is described on the Nomad page. Another example of Nomad's power is illustrated by Nicholas Rawlings in his comments for the Computer History Museum about NCSS (see citation below). He reports that James Martin asked Rawlings for a Nomad solution to a standard problem Martin called the Engineer's Problem: "give 6% raises to engineers whose job ratings had an average of 7 or better." Martin provided a "dozen pages of COBOL, and then just a page or two of Mark IV, from Informatics." Rawlings offered the following single statement, performing a set-at-a-time operation... The development of the 4GL was influenced by several factors, with the hardware and operating system constraints having a large weight. When the 4GL was first introduced, a disparate mix of hardware and operating systems mandated custom application development support that was specific to the system in order to ensure sales. One example is the MAPPER system developed by Sperry. Though it has roots back to the beginning, the system has proven successful in many applications and has been ported to modern platforms. The latest variant is embedded in the BIS[8] offering of Unisys. MARK-IV is now known as VISION:BUILDER and is offered by Computer Associates. Santa Fe railroad used MAPPER to develop a system, in a project that was an early example of 4GL, rapid prototyping, and programming by users.[9] The idea was that it was easier to teach railroad experts to use MAPPER than to teach programmers the "intricacies of railroad operations".[10] One of the early (and portable) languages that had 4GL properties was Ramis developed by Gerald C. Cohen at Mathematica, a mathematical software company. Cohen left Mathematica and founded Information Builders to create a similar reporting-oriented 4GL, called FOCUS. Later 4GL types are tied to a database system and are far different from the earlier types in their use of techniques and resources that have resulted from the general improvement of computing with time. An interesting twist to the 4GL scene is realization that graphical interfaces and the related reasoning done by the user form a 'language' that is poorly understood. Types[edit] A number of different types of 4GLs exist: Table-driven (codeless) programming, usually running with a runtime framework and libraries. Instead of using code, the developer defines their logic by selecting an operation in a pre-defined list of memory or data table manipulation commands. In other words, instead of coding, the developer uses table-driven algorithm programming (see also control tables that can be used for this purpose). A good example of this type of 4GL language is PowerBuilder. These types of tools can be used for business application development usually consisting in a package allowing for both business data manipulation and reporting, therefore they come with GUI screens and report editors. They usually offer integration with lower level DLLs generated from a typical 3GL for when the need arise for more hardware/OS specific operations. Report-generator programming languages take a description of the data format and the report to generate and from that they either generate the required report directly or they generate a program to generate the report. See also RPG Similarly, forms generators manage online interactions with the application system users or generate programs to do so. More ambitious 4GLs (sometimes termed fourth generation environments) attempt to automatically generate whole systems from the outputs of CASE tools, specifications of screens and reports, and possibly also the specification of some additional processing logic. Data management 4GLs such as SAS, SPSS, and Stata provide sophisticated coding commands for data manipulation, file reshaping, case selection, and data documentation in the preparation of data for statistical analysis and reporting. So-called "XTalk" languages, developed initially with Apple's Hypercard in 1987. Hypercard was the progenitor of more modern and powerful programs such as SuperCard, Toolbook and LiveCode. Some 4GLs have integrated tools that allow for the easy specification of all the required information: James Martin's version of Information Engineering systems development methodology was automated to allow the input of the results of system analysis and design in the form of data flow diagrams, entity relationship diagrams, entity life history diagrams etc., from which hundreds of thousands of lines of COBOL would be generated overnight. More recently Oracle Corporation's Oracle Designer and Oracle Developer Suite 4GL products could be integrated to produce database definitions and the forms and reports programs. Low code environments[edit] In the twenty-first century, 4GL systems have emerged as "low code" environments or platforms for the problem of rapid application development in short periods of time. Vendors often provide sample systems such as CRM, contract management, bug tracking from which development can occur with little programming.[11] Examples[edit] General use / versatile[edit] Accelerator (Productivity) Accell/SQL (4GL) from Unify Corporation. CA-Telon 4GL Cobol/PLI generator Clarion Clipper Cognos PowerHouse 4GL DataFlex FOCUS Forté TOOL (transactional object-oriented language) GeneXus Harbour IBM Rational EGL (Enterprise Generation Language) LabVIEW LANSA LINC LiveCode M-Power NATURAL Omnis Studio SDK Oracle Application Development Framework OutSystems (Productivity/PaaS) PowerBuilder DEC RALLY SheerPower4GL (Microsoft Windows only) SQLWindows/Team Developer Uniface Unix Shell DataFlex (Microsoft Windows, web, mobile) Visual FoxPro XBase++ Database query languages[edit] FOCUS 4D QL Informix-4GL NATURAL OpenEdge ABL OpenROAD (Ingres 4GL) Ramis SQL Report generators[edit] LINC Oracle Reports Progress 4GL Query/Results RPG-II Extract data from files or database to create reports in a wide range of formats is done by the report generator tools. Data manipulation, analysis, and reporting languages[edit] Ab Initio ABAP Audit Command Language Clarion Programming Language CorVision Culprit ADS/Online (plus transaction processing) Easytrieve FOCUS GraphTalk IDL IGOR Pro Informix-4GL JSL LANSA M-Power LabVIEW LiveCode MANTIS MAPPER (Unisys/Sperry) now part of BIS MARK-IV (Sterling/Informatics) now VISION:BUILDER of CA Simulink a component of MATLAB NATURAL Nomad Octave PL/SQL Progress 4GL PROIV R Ramis S Scilab SAS SPSS SQL PL SQR Stata Synon Wolfram Language XBase++ Xquery XSLT software creators[edit] 4th Dimension (Software) LiveCode MATLAB's GUIDE Omnis Studio OpenROAD Progress 4GL AppBuilder SuperTalk Visual DataFlex XUL Can be used with Xquery Mathematical optimization[edit] AIMMS AMPL GAMS MathProg MATLAB Mathematica Database-driven GUI application development[edit] C/AL Genexus SB+/SystemBuilder Unify VISION Low code / No code development platforms[12][13][edit] 1C:Enterprise programming language Appcelerator Appian Bizagi DronaHQ[14] K2[15] Kony[16] LANSA M-Power Mendix OutSystems Pegasystems PNMsoft Progress ServiceNow Servoy ViziApps WebRatio Screen painters and generators[edit] Oracle Forms Progress 4GL ProVision SB+/SystemBuilder Web development languages[edit] ActiveVFP CFML LANSA OutSystems Wavemaker See also[edit] First-generation programming language Second-generation programming language Third-generation programming language Fifth-generation programming language List of fourth-generation programming languages Domain-specific programming language Rapid application development References[edit] ^ 35th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1002 Domain-Specific Languages for Software Engineering Archived May 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ Arie van Deursen; Paul Klint; Joost Visser (1998). "Domain-Specific Languages:An Annotated Bibliography". Archived from the original on 2009-02-02. Retrieved 2009-03-15. ^ "Software development, CASE tools and 4GLs—A survey of New Zealand usage. Part 1: 750 New Zealand organisations". hdl:10523/928. Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ http://www.rogerclarke.com/SOS/SwareGenns.html ^ "Definition of fourth-generation language". PCMAG. Retrieved 7 May 2020. ^ Martin, James. Application Development Without Programmers. Prentice-Hall, 1981. ISBN 0-13-038943-9. ^ "IBM Punch Cards". www.columbia.edu. Archived from the original on 2019-02-16. Retrieved 2019-02-03. ^ "Data Mining Software, Data Analysis, and More: Unisys Business Information Server Features". Unisys. 2006-08-21. Archived from the original on 2006-08-21. Retrieved 2019-02-03. ^ Louis Schlueter (1988). User-Designed Computing: The Next Generation. [book on report generator and MAPPER systems] ^ Barbara Canning McNurlin; Ralph H. Sprague (2004). "Ch. 9". Information Systems Management in Practice (PDF). Pearson/Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-101139-7. [permanent dead link] ^ Forrest, Conner. "How Salesforce is using low-code orchestration to save 'floundering IoT projects'". ZDNet. ^ Marvin, By Rob; August 10, 2018 1:50PM EST; August 10, 2018. "The Best Low-Code Development Platforms for 2019". PCMAG.CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) ^ Sayer, Martin Heller and Peter (6 April 2018). "25 simple tools for building mobile apps fast". InfoWorld. Archived from the original on 18 November 2017. Retrieved 17 November 2017. ^ "DronaHQ. Build apps without coding". www.dronahq.com. Archived from the original on 2019-08-09. Retrieved 2019-09-11. ^ "K2 - Digital Process Automation". www.k2.com. Archived from the original on 2017-11-21. Retrieved 2017-11-20. ^ "Kony. Accelerate digital success". Kony. Archived from the original on 2017-11-24. Retrieved 2017-11-20. v t e Programming language generations 1GL 2GL 3GL 4GL 5GL v t e Types of computer language Types Architecture description Data exchange Hardware description Knowledge representation Markup Modeling Programming language Query Shading Specification Stylesheet Transformation See also Category:Lists of computer languages Category:Lists of programming languages List of programming languages by type Authority control BNF: cb11941625x (data) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fourth-generation_programming_language&oldid=988279627" Categories: Programming language classification Fourth-generation programming languages Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Bosanski Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Slovenščina Српски / srpski 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2020, at 05:54 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement