Second normal form - Wikipedia Second normal form From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from 2NF) Jump to navigation Jump to search Second normal form (2NF) is a normal form used in database normalization. 2NF was originally defined by E. F. Codd in 1971.[1] A relation is in the second normal form if it fulfills the following two requirements: It is in first normal form. It does not have any non-prime attribute that is functionally dependent on any proper subset of any candidate key of the relation. A non-prime attribute of a relation is an attribute that is not a part of any candidate key of the relation. Put simply, a relation is in 2NF if it is in 1NF and every non-prime attribute of the relation is dependent on the whole of every candidate key. Note that it does not put any restriction on the non-prime to non-prime attribute dependency. That is addressed in third normal form. Contents 1 2NF and candidate keys 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links 2NF and candidate keys[edit] A functional dependency on part of any candidate key is a violation of 2NF. In addition to the primary key, the relation may contain other candidate keys; it is necessary to establish that no non-prime attributes have part-key dependencies on any of these candidate keys. The following relation does not satisfy 2NF because: {Manufacturer country} is functionally dependent on {Manufacturer} {Manufacturer country} is not part of a candidate key, so it is a non-prime attribute {Manufacturer} is a proper subset of {Manufacturer, Model} candidate key Since {Manufacturer country} is a non-prime attribute functionally dependent on a part of a candidate key, the relation is in violation of 2NF. Electric toothbrush models Manufacturer Model Model full name Manufacturer country Forte X-Prime Forte X-Prime Italy Forte Ultraclean Forte Ultraclean Italy Dent-o-Fresh EZbrush Dent-o-Fresh EZbrush USA Brushmaster SuperBrush Brushmaster SuperBrush USA Kobayashi ST-60 Kobayashi ST-60 Japan Hoch Toothmaster Hoch Toothmaster Germany Hoch X-Prime Hoch X-Prime Germany Even if the designer has specified the primary key as {Model full name}, the relation is not in 2NF because of the other candidate keys. {Manufacturer, Model} is also a candidate key, and Manufacturer country is dependent on a proper subset of it: Manufacturer. To make the design conform to 2NF, it is necessary to have two relations: Electric toothbrush manufacturers Manufacturer Manufacturer country Forte Italy Dent-o-Fresh USA Brushmaster USA Kobayashi Japan Hoch Germany Electric toothbrush models Manufacturer Model Model full name Forte X-Prime Forte X-Prime Forte Ultraclean Forte Ultraclean Dent-o-Fresh EZbrush Dent-o-Fresh EZbrush Brushmaster SuperBrush Brushmaster SuperBrush Kobayashi ST-60 Kobayashi ST-60 Hoch Toothmaster Hoch Toothmaster Hoch X-Prime Hoch X-Prime See also[edit] For other normal forms, see the navigation bar at the bottom of the page. Attribute-value system References[edit] ^ Codd, E. F. "Further Normalization of the Data Base Relational Model". (Presented at Courant Computer Science Symposia Series 6, "Data Base Systems", New York City, May 24–25, 1971.) IBM Research Report RJ909 (August 31, 1971). Republished in Randall J. Rustin (ed.), Data Base Systems: Courant Computer Science Symposia Series 6. Prentice-Hall, 1972. Further reading[edit] Litt's Tips: Normalization Date, C. J.; Lorentzos, N.; Darwen, H. (2002). Temporal Data & the Relational Model (1st ed.). Morgan Kaufmann. ISBN 1-55860-855-9. Date, C. J. (2004). Introduction to Database Systems (8th ed.). Boston: Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0-321-19784-9. Kent, W. (1983). "A Simple Guide to Five Normal Forms in Relational Database Theory". Communications of the ACM. 26: 120–125. External links[edit] Database Normalization Basics by Mike Chapple (About.com) An Introduction to Database Normalization by Mike Hillyer. A tutorial on the first 3 normal forms by Fred Coulson Description of the database normalization basics by Microsoft v t e Database normalization Unnormalized form (UNF/NF2) First normal form (1NF) Second normal form (2NF) Third normal form (3NF) Elementary key normal form (EKNF) Boyce–Codd normal form (3.5NF / BCNF) Fourth normal form (4NF) Fifth normal form (5NF / PJNF) Domain-key normal form (DKNF) Sixth normal form (6NF) Denormalization Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Second_normal_form&oldid=985742111" Categories: Database normalization Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Deutsch Español 한국어 Македонски Русский Simple English Српски / srpski தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 27 October 2020, at 18:03 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement