List of Java APIs - Wikipedia List of Java APIs From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Java API) Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia list article This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article has an unclear citation style. The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting. Violates Wikipedia:External links: "Wikipedia articles may include links to web pages outside Wikipedia (external links), but they should not normally be used in the body of an article.". (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "List of Java APIs" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) There are two types of Java programming language application programming interfaces (APIs): The official core Java API, contained in the Android (Google), SE (OpenJDK and Oracle), MicroEJ. These packages (java.* packages) are the core Java language packages, meaning that programmers using the Java language had to use them in order to make any worthwhile use of the Java language. Optional APIs that can be downloaded separately. The specification of these APIs are defined according to many different organizations in the world (Alljoyn, OSGi, Eclipse, JCP, E-S-R, etc.). The following is a partial list of application programming interfaces (APIs) for Java. Contents 1 APIs 2 Real-Time Specification for Java 3 See also 4 Notes 5 External links APIs[edit] Name Acronym Description and Version History Available from Java Advanced Imaging JAI A set of interfaces that support a high-level programming model allowing to manipulate images easily. Association for the standardization of embedded platforms E-S-R consortium here Java Data Objects JDO A specification of Java object persistence. Android API Google here JavaHelp A full-featured, extensible help system that enables you to incorporate online help in applets, components, applications, operating systems, and devices. available here Java Media Framework JMF An API that enables audio, video and other time-based media to be added to Java applications and applets. Java Naming and Directory Interface JNDI An API for directory services. Java Persistence API JPA A specification for object-relational mapping. JSR 338 Java Speech API JSAPI This API allows for speech synthesis and speech recognition. Java 3D J3D A scene graph-based 3D API. available here Java OpenGL JOGL A wrapper library for OpenGL. available here Java USB for Windows (none) A USB communication of Java applications available here Facebook4j (none) Facebook API wrapper in Java. available here Twitter4j (none) Java library for the Twitter API available here Discord Java API JDA Java library for the Discord API available here Name Acronym Java package(s) that contain the API JavaBeans Activation Framework JAF javax.activation JavaMail (none) javax.mail Java Message Service JMS javax.jms JavaServer Faces JSF javax.faces Name Acronym Available from Java API for XML-Based RPC JAX-RPC available here XQuery API for Java XQJ here and here Name Acronym Available from Connected Limited Device Configuration CLDC Reference implementation is available here Java Telephony API JTAPI available here STM32 Java technology STM32Java available here MicroEJ embedded platform MicroEJ available here Following is a very incomplete list, as the number of APIs available for the Java platform is overwhelming. Rich Client platforms Eclipse Rich Client Platform (RCP) NetBeans Platform Office_compliant libraries Apache POI Aspose JXL - for Microsoft Excel JExcel - for Microsoft Excel Compression LZMA SDK, the Java implementation of the SDK used by the popular 7-Zip file archive software (available here) JSON Jackson (API) Game engines Slick jMonkey Engine JPCT Engine LWJGL Real-time libraries Real time Java is a catch-all term for a combination of technologies that allows programmers to write programs that meet the demands of real-time systems in the Java programming language. Java's sophisticated memory management, native support for threading and concurrency, type safety,and relative simplicity have created a demand for its use in many domains. Its capabilities have been enhanced to support real time computational needs: Java supports a strict priority based threading model. Because Java threads support priorities, Java locking mechanisms support priority inversion avoidance techniques, such as priority inheritance or the priority ceiling protocol. To overcome typical real time difficulties, the Java Community introduced a specification for real-time Java, JSR001. A number of implementations of the resulting Real-Time Specification for Java (RTSJ) have emerged, including a reference implementation from Timesys, IBM's WebSphere Real Time, Sun Microsystems's Java SE Real-Time Systems,[1] Aonix PERC or JamaicaVM from aicas. The RTSJ addressed the critical issues by mandating a minimum (only two)specification for the threading model (and allowing other models to be plugged into the VM) and by providing for areas of memorythat are not subject to garbage collection, along with threads that arenot preemptable by the garbage collector. These areas are instead managed using region-based memory management. Real-Time Specification for Java[edit] The Real-Time Specification for Java (RTSJ) is a set of interfaces and behavioral refinements that enable real-time computer programming in the Java programming language. RTSJ 1.0 was developed as JSR 1 under the Java Community Process, which approved the new standard in November, 2001. RTSJ 2.0 is being developed under JSR 282. A draft version is available at JSR 282 JCP Page. More information can be found at RTSJ 2.0 Javolution Windowing libraries The windowing library is a set of classes available in the Streams Processing Language (SPL) Runtime C++ API and the SPL Java™ Operator API. The library is used to implement primitive operators that need windows following the SPL window semantics. Using the windowing library provides a consistent window policy semantic across operators, and simplifies the operator implementation. SPL offers both tumbling and sliding windows. Both types of windows keep all the incoming data in memory until its tuple eviction policy triggers. Use the SPL support for windows when the functionality required by the primitive operator can be built using the semantics provided by SPL window constructs. One example operator from the SPL Standard Toolkit that uses the windowing library and syntax is the Aggregate operator. An example operator that buffers recently received tuples but that does not use the windowing library and syntax is the DeDuplicate operator. This action occurs because this operator has different eviction and trigger semantics than the ones provided by SPL. This operator needs to maintain only unique tuples and discards all repeated tuples that are received within a time window. With the windowing library, developers can specify different eviction and trigger policies but can implement the event handling actions independently of the window policy details. There are a few differences when implementing primitive operators in C++ and Java that take advantage of the SPL window clause. In the C++ implementation, developers have no obligation to use the window library (the preferred practice is to use library). They are free to use the SPL Operator Code Generation API just to get the specified window policy for a given operator instance. Then, they can generate code using other containers. In addition, developers can check for valid window configurations during code generation time. In the Java implementation, developers must use the window library. This action can be achieved by registering a class that implements com.ibm.streams.operator.window.StreamWindowListener<T> that handles events generated by a window (com.ibm.streams.operator.window.StreamWindow<T>). This use is required because Java operators are not based on code generation. As a result, windows are automatically managed by the runtime to guarantee SPL window semantics. Developers can check for valid window configurations during runtime by checking the window policy associated to a given input port. Standard Widget Toolkit (SWT) Physics libraries JBox2D JBullet dyn4j See also[edit] Java Platform Application programming interface Java ConcurrentMap List of Java Frameworks Notes[edit] External links[edit] APISonar - Search Java API examples Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Java_APIs&oldid=985545876" Categories: Java APIs Lists of software Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia references cleanup from December 2017 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2017 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Español 한국어 Magyar Русский Tiếng Việt Edit links This page was last edited on 26 October 2020, at 15:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement