Limbo (programming language) - Wikipedia Limbo (programming language) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For other uses, see Limbo (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Limbo" programming language – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Limbo Paradigm Concurrent Designed by Sean Dorward, Phil Winterbottom, Rob Pike Developer Bell Labs / Vita Nuova Holdings First appeared 1995; 25 years ago (1995) Typing discipline Strong OS Inferno License Open source Website www.vitanuova.com/inferno/limbo.html Major implementations Dis virtual machine Influenced by C, Pascal, CSP, Alef, Newsqueak Influenced Stackless Python, Go, Rust Limbo is a programming language for writing distributed systems and is the language used to write applications for the Inferno operating system. It was designed at Bell Labs by Sean Dorward, Phil Winterbottom, and Rob Pike. The Limbo compiler generates architecture-independent object code which is then interpreted by the Dis virtual machine or compiled just before runtime to improve performance. Therefore all Limbo applications are completely portable across all Inferno platforms. Limbo's approach to concurrency was inspired by Hoare's communicating sequential processes (CSP), as implemented and amended in Pike's earlier Newsqueak language and Winterbottom's Alef. Contents 1 Language features 2 Virtual machine 3 Examples 3.1 Hello world 4 Books 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Language features[edit] Limbo supports the following features: modular programming concurrent programming strong type checking at compile and run-time interprocess communication over typed channels automatic garbage collection simple abstract data types Virtual machine[edit] The Dis virtual machine that executes Limbo code is a CISC-like VM, with instructions for arithmetic, control flow, data motion, process creation, synchronizing and communicating between processes, loading modules of code, and support for higher-level data-types: strings, arrays, lists, and communication channels.[1] It uses a hybrid of reference counting and a real-time garbage-collector for cyclic data.[2] Aspects of the design of Dis were inspired by the AT&T Hobbit microprocessor, as used in the original BeBox. Examples[edit] Limbo uses Ada-style definitions as in:  name := type value; name0,name1 : type = value; name2,name3 : type; name2 = value; Hello world[edit]  implement Command;  include "sys.m";     sys: Sys;  include "draw.m"; include "sh.m";  init(nil: ref Draw->Context, nil: list of string) {     sys = load Sys Sys->PATH;     sys->print("Hello World!\n"); } Books[edit] The 3rd edition of the Inferno operating system and Limbo programming language are described in the textbook Inferno Programming with Limbo ISBN 0-470-84352-7 (Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 2003), by Phillip Stanley-Marbell. Another textbook The Inferno Programming Book: An Introduction to Programming for the Inferno Distributed System, by Martin Atkins, Charles Forsyth, Rob Pike and Howard Trickey, was started, but never released. See also[edit] Free and open-source software portal The Inferno operating system Alef, the predecessor of Limbo Plan 9 from Bell Labs Go (programming language), similar language from Google AT&T Hobbit, a processor architecture which inspired the Dis VM References[edit] ^ "Dis Virtual Machine Specification". Vita Nuova. 2000. Retrieved 2 February 2015. ^ Lorenz Huelsbergen and Phil Winterbottom. "Very Concurrent Mark and Sweep Garbage Collection without Fine-Grain Synchronization" (PDF). Cite journal requires |journal= (help) External links[edit] Vita Nuova page on Limbo A Descent into Limbo by Brian Kernighan The Limbo Programming Language by Dennis M. Ritchie and Addendum by Vita Nuova. Inferno Programming with Limbo by Phillip Stanley-Marbell Threaded programming in the Bell Labs CSP style Dis source code The design of the Inferno virtual machine, Vita nuova . "Dis VM design", Inferno (4th ed.), Cat V . "Dis VM specification", Inferno (4th ed.), Cat V . v t e Rob Pike Operating systems Plan 9 from Bell Labs Inferno Programming languages Newsqueak Limbo Go Sawzall Software acme Blit sam rio 8½ Publications The Practice of Programming The Unix Programming Environment Other Renée French Mark V. Shaney UTF-8 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Limbo_(programming_language)&oldid=987140681" Categories: C programming language family Concurrent programming languages Free compilers and interpreters Inferno (operating system) Virtual machines Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles needing additional references from October 2013 All articles needing additional references Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français ગુજરાતી Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 5 November 2020, at 04:47 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement