3D computer graphics - Wikipedia 3D computer graphics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Graphics that use a three-dimensional representation of geometric data See also: Computer graphics (computer science) and Computer graphics This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "3D computer graphics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Three-dimensional (3D) computer graphics Fundamentals Modeling Scanning Rendering Printing Primary uses 3D models Computer-aided design Graphic design Video games Visual effects Visualization Virtual engineering Virtual reality Virtual cinematography Related topics Computer-generated imagery (CGI) Animation computer skeletal 3D display Wire-frame model Texture mapping Motion capture Crowd simulation Global illumination Volume rendering v t e 3D computer graphics, or three-dimensional computer graphics (in contrast to 2D computer graphics), are graphics that use a three-dimensional representation of geometric data (often Cartesian) that is stored in the computer for the purposes of performing calculations and rendering 2D images. The resulting images may be stored for viewing later (possibly as an animation) or displayed in real time. Unlike 3D film and similar techniques, the result is two-dimensional, without the illusion of being solid. 3D computer graphics rely on many of the same algorithms as 2D computer vector graphics in the wire-frame model and 2D computer raster graphics in the final rendered display. In computer graphics software, 2D applications may use 3D techniques to achieve effects such as lighting, and, similarly, 3D may use some 2D rendering techniques. The objects in 3D computer graphics are often referred to as 3D models. Unlike the rendered image, a model's data is contained within a graphical data file. A 3D model is a mathematical representation of any three-dimensional object; a model is not technically a graphic until it is displayed. A model can be displayed visually as a two-dimensional image through a process called 3D rendering, or it can be used in non-graphical computer simulations and calculations. With 3D printing, models are rendered into an actual 3D physical representation of themselves, with some limitations as to how accurately the physical model can match the virtual model.[1] Contents 1 History 2 Overview 2.1 Modeling 2.2 Materials and textures 2.3 Layout and animation 2.4 Rendering 3 Software 3.1 File formats 3.2 Modeling 3.3 Computer-aided design (CAD) 3.4 Complementary tools 4 Communities 5 Differences with other types of computer graphics 5.1 Distinction from photorealistic 2D graphics 5.2 Pseudo-3D and true 3D 6 See also 7 References 8 External links History[edit] Main article: History of computer animation William Fetter was credited with coining the term computer graphics in 1961[2][3] to describe his work at Boeing. One of the first displays of computer animation was Futureworld (1976), which included an animation of a human face and a hand that had originally appeared in the 1971 experimental short A Computer Animated Hand, created by University of Utah students Edwin Catmull and Fred Parke.[4] 3D computer graphics software began appearing for home computers in the late 1970s. The earliest known example is 3D Art Graphics, a set of 3D computer graphics effects, written by Kazumasa Mitazawa and released in June 1978 for the Apple II.[5][6] Overview[edit] 3D computer graphics creation falls into three basic phases: 3D modeling – the process of forming a computer model of an object's shape Layout and animation – the placement and movement of objects within a scene 3D rendering – the computer calculations that, based on light placement, surface types, and other qualities, generate the image Modeling[edit] Main article: 3D modeling The model describes the process of forming the shape of an object. The two most common sources of 3D models are those that an artist or engineer originates on the computer with some kind of 3D modeling tool, and models scanned into a computer from real-world objects (Polygonal Modeling, Patch Modeling and NURBS Modeling are some popular tools used in 3d modeling). Models can also be produced procedurally or via physical simulation. Basically, a 3D model is formed from points called vertices (or vertexes) that define the shape and form polygons. A polygon is an area formed from at least three vertexes (a triangle). A polygon of n points is an n-gon.[7] The overall integrity of the model and its suitability to use in animation depend on the structure of the polygons. Materials and textures[edit] Materials and textures are properties that the render engine uses to render the model. One can give the model materials to tell the render engine how to treat light when it hits the surface. Textures are used to give the material color using a color or albedo map, or give the surface features using a bump map or normal map. It can be also used to deform the model itself using a displacement map. Layout and animation[edit] Main article: Computer animation Before rendering into an image, objects must be laid out in a scene. This defines spatial relationships between objects, including location and size. Animation refers to the temporal description of an object (i.e., how it moves and deforms over time. Popular methods include keyframing, inverse kinematics, and motion capture). These techniques are often used in combination. As with animation, physical simulation also specifies motion. Rendering[edit] Main article: 3D rendering Rendering converts a model into an image either by simulating light transport to get photo-realistic images, or by applying an art style as in non-photorealistic rendering. The two basic operations in realistic rendering are transport (how much light gets from one place to another) and scattering (how surfaces interact with light). This step is usually performed using 3D computer graphics software or a 3D graphics API. Altering the scene into a suitable form for rendering also involves 3D projection, which displays a three-dimensional image in two dimensions. Although 3D modeling and CAD software may perform 3D rendering as well (e.g. Autodesk 3ds Max or Blender), exclusive 3D rendering software also exists.[citation needed] Examples of 3D rendering Far left: A 3D rendering with ray tracing and ambient occlusion using Blender and YafaRay Center left: A 3d model of a Dunkerque-class battleship rendered with flat shading Center right: During the 3D rendering step, the number of reflections "light rays" can take, as well as various other attributes, can be tailored to achieve a desired visual effect. Rendered with Cobalt.Far right: Experience Curiosity, a real-time web application which leverages 3D rendering capabilities of browsers (WebGL) Software[edit] 3D computer graphics software produces computer-generated imagery (CGI) through 3D modeling and 3D rendering or produces 3D models for analytic, scientific and industrial purposes. File formats[edit] Main article: List of file formats § 3D graphics There are many varieties of files supporting 3D graphics, for example, Wavefront .obj files and .x DirectX files. With their own unique data structure. Each file format can be accessed through their own application, such as DirectX files, and Quake. Or through third party standalone program. Or even through manual decompiling. Modeling[edit] Main article: 3D modeling software 3D modeling software is a class of 3D computer graphics software used to produce 3D models. Individual programs of this class are called modeling applications or modelers. 3D modelers allow users to create and alter models via their 3D mesh. Users can add, subtract, stretch and otherwise change the mesh to their desire. Models can be viewed from a variety of angles, usually simultaneously. Models can be rotated and the view can be zoomed in and out. 3D modelers can export their models to files, which can then be imported into other applications as long as the metadata are compatible. Many modelers allow importers and exporters to be plugged-in, so they can read and write data in the native formats of other applications. Most 3D modelers contain a number of related features, such as ray tracers and other rendering alternatives and texture mapping facilities. Some also contain features that support or allow animation of models. Some may be able to generate full-motion video of a series of rendered scenes (i.e. animation). Computer-aided design (CAD)[edit] Main article: Computer-aided design Computer aided design software may employ the same fundamental 3D modeling techniques that 3D modeling software use but their goal differs. They are used in computer-aided engineering, computer-aided manufacturing, Finite element analysis, product lifecycle management, 3D printing and computer-aided architectural design. Complementary tools[edit] After producing video, studios then edit or composite the video using programs such as Adobe Premiere Pro or Final Cut Pro at the mid-level, or Autodesk Combustion, Digital Fusion, Shake at the high-end. Match moving software is commonly used to match live video with computer-generated video, keeping the two in sync as the camera moves. Use of real-time computer graphics engines to create a cinematic production is called machinima.[8] Communities[edit] There are a multitude of websites designed to help, educate and support 3D graphic artists. Some are managed by software developers and content providers, but there are standalone sites as well. These communities allow for members to seek advice, post tutorials, provide product reviews or post examples of their own work.[citation needed] Differences with other types of computer graphics[edit] Distinction from photorealistic 2D graphics[edit] See also: Still life § 21st century Not all computer graphics that appear 3D are based on a wireframe model. 2D computer graphics with 3D photorealistic effects are often achieved without wireframe modeling and are sometimes indistinguishable in the final form. Some graphic art software includes filters that can be applied to 2D vector graphics or 2D raster graphics on transparent layers. Visual artists may also copy or visualize 3D effects and manually render photorealistic effects without the use of filters. Pseudo-3D and true 3D[edit] Main article: 2.5D Some video games use restricted projections of three-dimensional environments, such as isometric graphics or virtual cameras with fixed angles, either as a way to improve performance of the game engine, or for stylistic and gameplay concerns. Such games are said to use pseudo-3D graphics. By contrast, games using 3D computer graphics without such restrictions are said to use true 3D. See also[edit] Graphics and software Glossary of computer graphics Comparison of 3D computer graphics software Graphics processing unit (GPU) Graphical output devices List of 3D computer graphics software List of 3D modeling software List of 3D rendering software Real-time computer graphics Reflection (computer graphics) Rendering (computer graphics) Fields of use 3D data acquisition and object reconstruction 3D motion controller 3D projection on 2D planes 3D reconstruction 3D reconstruction from multiple images Anaglyph 3D Computer animation Computer vision Digital geometry Digital image processing Game development tool Game engine Geometry pipelines Geometry processing Graphics Isometric graphics in video games and pixel art Level editor List of stereoscopic video games Medical animation Render farm SIGGRAPH Stereoscopy Timeline of computer animation in film and television Video game graphics References[edit] ^ "3D computer graphics". ScienceDaily. Retrieved 2019-01-19. ^ "An Historical Timeline of Computer Graphics and Animation". Archived from the original on 2008-03-10. Retrieved 2009-07-22. ^ "Computer Graphics". ^ "Pixar founder's Utah-made Hand added to National Film Registry". The Salt Lake Tribune. December 28, 2011. Retrieved January 8, 2012. ^ "Brutal Deluxe Software". www.brutaldeluxe.fr. ^ "PROJECTS AND ARTICLES Retrieving Japanese Apple II programs". Archived from the original on 2016-10-05. Retrieved 2017-03-26. ^ Simmons, Bruce. "n-gon". MathWords. Archived from the original on 2018-12-15. Retrieved 2018-11-30. ^ "Machinima". Internet Archive. Retrieved 2020-07-12. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to 3D computer graphics. Look up computer graphics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. A Critical History of Computer Graphics and Animation (Wayback Machine copy) How Stuff Works - 3D Graphics History of Computer Graphics series of articles (Wayback Machine copy) How 3D Works - Explains 3D modeling for an illuminated manuscript v t e Animation topics By country Bangladesh Bhutan China Czech Republic Estonia India Japan Malaysia Mexico North Korea Philippines Portugal Romania South Africa South Korea Spain Taiwan Thailand United States Vietnam History Azerbaijan Bangladesh Brazil Canada China France Hungary Iran Japan Korea Russia United Kingdom United States Silent Era The Golden Age World War II Early TV broadcast era Modern TV cable and streaming era Industry Animator List Animation department Animation director Story artist Animation studios List Animation database Art pipeline Biologist simulators Animation film festivals international regional Highest-grossing films (Openings weekends) Outsourcing International Animation Day Works Films Based on cartoons Computer-animated Feature-length Lost or unfinished Package Short Short series Stop-motion Series Direct-to-video Internet Television Techniques Traditional Barrier grid Flip book Limited animation Masking Rotoscoping Exposure sheet Stop motion Clay clay painting, strata-cut Cutout (silhouette) Graphic Model go motion Object Pixilation Puppetoon Computer (history, timeline) 2D Flash PowerPoint SVG CSS Multi-sketch Onion skinning Digital puppetry 3D T-pose Cel shading Crowd Morph target Motion capture Non-photorealistic rendering Physically based animation Procedural Skeletal Machinima Digital puppetry Virtual cinematography Puppetry Puppet Digital puppetry Other methods Blocking Chuckimation Drawn-on-film Inbetweening Paint-on-glass Pinscreen Pixel art Pose to pose Straight ahead Rubber hose Sand Syncro-Vox Zoetrope Variants Abstract animation (visual music) Adult animation Animated cartoon Animated sitcom Animated documentary Anime Educational animation Erotic animation Independent animation Instructional animation Related topics Animation music Bouncing ball Mickey Mousing Key frame Cel Character animation model sheet walk cycle lip sync off-model Creature animation Twelve principles Motion comic Films with live action and animation highest grossing Cartoon physics Cartoon violence Most expensive animated films List of animated films by box office admissions List of animated series by episode count anime series anime franchises Book Category Portal v t e 3D computer graphics software Open-source Blender GigaMesh Software Framework LuxCoreRender MakeHuman MeshLab OpenFX OpenSCAD Point Cloud Library POV-Ray Seamless3d Wings 3D YafaRay Closed-source 3D-Coat AC3D Autodesk 3ds Max Autodesk Alias Autodesk Maya Autodesk Mudbox AutoQ3D Community Blackmagic Fusion Bryce Carrara Cinema 4D Clara.io Daz Studio Electric Image Animation System E-on Vue Golaem Crowd Hexagon Houdini Indigo Renderer Kerkythea LightWave 3D MASSIVE Messiah Modo Nuke Paint 3D Pixar RenderMan Poser Remo 3D Rhinoceros 3D Sculptris Shade 3D Shark 3D Silo SketchUp Strata 3D Terragen ZBrush Defunct Amapi Autodesk Softimage Cyber Studio CAD-3D Dynamation Imagine N-World PowerAnimator Sculpt 3D Softimage 3D StrataVision 3D Swift 3D TrueSpace TurboSilver VistaPro Core technologies ACIS C3D HOOPS 3D KernelCAD Open Cascade Technology Parasolid Romulus RGK ShapeManager Teigha IntelliCAD Comparison Category List 3D modeling 3D rendering Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=3D_computer_graphics&oldid=990971130" Categories: 3D computer graphics Computer graphics 3D graphics software 3D imaging Visual effects Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bân-lâm-gú Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip සිංහල Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 27 November 2020, at 15:47 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement