Open Source Initiative - Wikipedia Open Source Initiative From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Non-profit organization promoting open-source software Not to be confused with Open Software Foundation or National Open Source Enterprise. Open Source Initiative Trademarked OSI "keyhole" logo Formation February 1998 (22 years ago) (1998-02) Location Palo Alto, California, U.S.[1] Area served Worldwide President Josh Simmons Budget US$209,500[2] Revenue US$209,500[3] Website opensource.org The Open Source Initiative (OSI) is a California public benefit corporation, with 501(c)3 tax-exempt status, founded in 1998.It promotes the usage of Open Source Software.[4] The organization was founded in late February 1998 by Bruce Perens and Eric S. Raymond, part of a group inspired by the Netscape Communications Corporation publishing the source code for its flagship Netscape Communicator product. Later, in August 1998, the organization added a board of directors. Raymond was president from its founding until February 2005, followed briefly by Russ Nelson and then Michael Tiemann. In May 2012, the new board elected Simon Phipps as president[5] and in May 2015 Allison Randal was elected as president[6] when Phipps stepped down in preparation for the 2016 end of his Board term.[7] Phipps became President again in September 2017.[8] Molly de Blanc was elected[9] President in May, 2019, followed by Josh Simmons[10] in May, 2020. Contents 1 History 2 2020 Leadership: Perens and ESR 3 Relationship with the free software movement 4 Board members 5 See also 6 References 7 External links History[edit] As a campaign of sorts, "open source" was launched in 1998 by Jon "maddog" Hall, Larry Augustin, Eric S. Raymond, Bruce Perens, and others.[11][12] The group adopted the Open Source Definition for open-source software, based on the Debian Free Software Guidelines. They also established the Open Source Initiative (OSI) as a steward organization for the movement. However, they were unsuccessful in their attempt to secure a trademark for 'open source' to control the use of the term.[13] In 2008, in an apparent effort to reform governance of the organization, the OSI Board invited 50 individuals to join a "Charter Members" group; by 26 July 2008, 42 of the original invitees had accepted the invitations. The full membership of the Charter Members has never been publicly revealed, and the Charter Members group communicated by way of a closed-subscription mailing list, "osi-discuss", with non-public archives.[14] In 2012, under the leadership of OSI director and then-president Simon Phipps, the OSI began transitioning towards a membership-based governance structure. The OSI initiated an Affiliate Membership program for "government-recognized non-profit charitable and not-for-profit industry associations and academic institutions anywhere in the world".[15] Subsequently, the OSI announced an Individual Membership program[16] and listed a number of Corporate Sponsors. As of 2020, Microsoft is listed as a corporate sponsor.[17] On November 8, 2013, OSI appointed Patrick Masson as its General Manager.[18] 2020 Leadership: Perens and ESR[edit] In January 2020, Bruce Perens left OSI over controversy regarding a license.[19] A few months later, Perens declared on social media: "We created a tower of babel of licenses.We did not design-in license compliance and we have a tremendous noncompliance problem that isn't getting better. We did not design a good framework for where proprietary software can go, and where it never should. Our license loopholes are exploited." After Bruce Perens' exit, Eric Raymond, co-founder of the OSI was banned from the OSI in March 2020. [20]"Specifically, Raymond was banned from the mailing lists used to organize and communicate with the OSI. For an organization to ban their founder from communicating with the group (such as via a mailing list) is a noteworthy move." Relationship with the free software movement[edit] Both the modern free software movement and the Open Source Initiative were born from a common history of Unix, Internet free software, and the hacker culture, but their basic goals and philosophy differ.[how?] The Open Source Initiative chose the term "open source," in founding member Michael Tiemann's words, to "dump the moralizing and confrontational attitude that had been associated with 'free software'" and instead promote open source ideas on "pragmatic, business-case grounds."[21] As early as 1999, OSI co-founder Perens objected to the "schism" that was developing between supporters of the Free Software Foundation (FSF) and the OSI because of their disparate approaches. (Perens had hoped the OSI would merely serve as an "introduction" to FSF principles for "non-hackers."[22]) Richard Stallman of FSF has sharply criticized the OSI for its pragmatic focus and for ignoring what he considers the central "ethical imperative" and emphasis on "freedom" underlying free software as he defines it.[23] Nevertheless, Stallman has described his free software movement and the Open Source Initiative as separate camps within the same broad free-software community and acknowledged that despite philosophical differences, proponents of open source and free software "often work together on practical projects."[23] Board members[edit] As of April 2020, the Open Source Initiative board of Directors is:[24] Deborah Bryant Megan Byrd-Sanicki Pamela Chestek Hong Phuc Dang Elana Hashman Tracy Hinds Chris Lamb Faidon Liambotis Patrick Masson Josh Simmons Italo Vignoli Past board members include[25]: Matt Asay Brian Behlendorf L. Peter Deutsch Ken Coar Danese Cooper Molly de Blanc Chris DiBona Karl Fogel Richard Fontana Rishab Aiyer Ghosh Mike Godwin Harshad Gune Christine Hall Leslie Hawthorn Joi Ito Jim Jagielski Fabio Kon Raj Mathur Martin Michlmayr Mike Milinkovich Ian Murdock Russ Nelson Nnenna Nwakanma Andrew C. Oliver[26] Bruce Perens Simon Phipps Allison Randal Eric S. Raymond Guido van Rossum Chip Salzenberg Tim Sailer Alolita Sharma Carol Smith Bruno Souza Paul Tagliamonte Michael Tiemann Luis Villa Tony Wasserman Sanjiva Weerawarana Stefano Zacchiroli See also[edit] Free and open-source software portal Digital freedom Comparison of open source and closed source Business models for open-source software Commons-based peer production – an economic model for organizing projects without leaders or financial compensation Open-source governance – use of open-source principles to transform human social governance Techno-progressivism – a stance of active support for the convergence of technological change and social progress Open-source movement – the evolution and evidence of the open-source ideology References[edit] ^ "Charity Navigator - Unrated Profile for Open Source Initiative". Archived from the original on 2019-05-12. ^ "Charity Navigator - Unrated Profile for Open Source Initiative". Archived from the original on 2019-05-12. ^ "Charity Navigator - Unrated Profile for Open Source Initiative". Archived from the original on 2019-05-12. ^ "About the Open Source Initiative | Open Source Initiative". Archived from the original on 2019-05-12. ^ "OSI Board Elects New Officers". 2012-05-21. Retrieved 2012-05-23. ^ Phipps, Simon. "Outgoing President tweet". Retrieved 13 May 2015. ^ Phipps, Simon. "Handing On The Baton". Open Source Initiative. Retrieved 15 May 2015. ^ Randal, Allison (28 September 2017). "Transitions in Leadership". Retrieved 10 October 2017. ^ "OSI Board Evolution | Open Source Initiative". ^ "Tweet about 2020 Officer Elections". ^ History of the OSI ^ A Look Back at 10 Years of OSI ^ http://www.opensource.org/pressreleases/certified-open-source.php Announcement of losing 'open source' trademark ^ "OSI Charter Member Discuss List". Archived from the original on 2013-04-21. Retrieved 2012-06-19. ^ "Become an OSI Affiliate". ^ "OSI Announces Individual Membership". ^ OSI Corporate Sponsors ^ "OSI Names New General Manager". LWN. 2013-10-23. Retrieved 2014-01-27. ^ https://sdtimes.com/os/osi-co-founder-leaves-initiative-over-new-license/. Missing or empty |title= (help) ^ "Corporations-Run OSI Removes Eric S Raymond (ESR)". ^ Tiemann, Michael (2006-09-19). "History of the OSI". Open Source Initiative. Retrieved 2009-04-25. ^ "It's Time to Talk About Free Software Again". 2014-11-19. Archived from the original on 2014-07-16. Retrieved 2014-11-19. ^ a b Stallman, Richard (2009-04-21). "Why 'Open Source' Misses the Point of Free Software". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved 2009-04-25. ^ "Board - Annotated". Open Source Initiative. Retrieved 17 April 2019. ^ "OSI Emeritus Members | Open Source Initiative". Open Source Initiative. Retrieved 17 February 2019. ^ 2009 OSI Board Elections held in April External links[edit] Official website List of OSI approved licenses v t e Free and open-source software General Alternative terms for free software Comparison of open-source and closed-source software Comparison of source-code-hosting facilities Free software Free software project directories Gratis versus libre Long-term support Open-source software Open-source software development Outline Timeline Software packages Audio Bioinformatics Codecs Configuration management Graphics Wireless Geophysics Health Mathematics Operating systems Programming languages Routing Television Video games Web applications E-commerce Android apps iOS apps Commercial Trademarked Formerly proprietary Formerly open-source Community Free software movement History Open-source-software movement Organizations Events Licenses AFL Apache APSL Artistic Beerware BSD Creative Commons CDDL EPL Free Software Foundation GNU GPL GNU LGPL ISC MIT MPL Python Python Software Foundation License Shared Source Initiative Sleepycat Unlicense WTFPL zlib Types and standards Comparison of licenses Contributor License Agreement Copyleft Debian Free Software Guidelines Definition of Free Cultural Works Free license The Free Software Definition The Open Source Definition Open-source license Permissive software license Public domain Viral license Challenges Digital rights management Hardware restrictions License proliferation Mozilla software rebranding Proprietary device drivers Proprietary firmware Proprietary software SCO/Linux controversies Software patents Software security Trusted Computing Related topics Forking GNU Manifesto Microsoft Open Specification Promise Open-core model Open-source hardware Shared Source Initiative Source-available software The Cathedral and the Bazaar Revolution OS Portal Category Book v t e Free-culture and open-source movements Concepts and practices Key concepts Commons-based peer production Crowdsourcing Gratis versus libre Open collaboration Open source Openness Participatory culture Sharism Social peer-to-peer processes Peer-to-peer banking Peer-to-peer carsharing Peer-to-peer lending Ridesharing company Research and science Citizen science Open science Access Notebook science Research Science data Plan S Data, information, and knowledge Free content Knowledge commons Open communication Open knowledge Content Data Communication and learning Media Collaborative writing Democratic media Open publishing Participatory media Peer review Education Open education Educational resources University Admissions Open-door academic policy Journalism Citizen media Citizen journalism and Wiki journalism Open-source journalism Economy, production, and development Products Free and open-source software (FOSS) Free/libre software Open-source software Open-design movement Robotics Open gaming Open-source architecture Open-source hardware Economic principles Gift economy Open innovation Open patent Open standard Sharing economy Politics and governance Open government Open-source governance Organizations Creative Commons Free Software Foundation Open Architecture Network Openmod Initiative Open Knowledge International Open Rights Group Open Source Initiative Open Web Foundation P2P Foundation Pirate Party PLOS SPARC Activists Tim Berners-Lee Alexandra Elbakyan Cody Wilson Lawrence Lessig Peter Murray-Rust Douglas Rushkoff Richard Stallman Peter Suber Peter Sunde Aaron Swartz Matthew H. Todd John Wilbanks Projects and movements DIYbio Free-culture movement Free software movement Open science movement Open Source Ecology Open-source software movement OpenCores OpenWetWare Sci-Hub Tools Licenses Creative Commons GPL Definition docs Free Cultural Works Free Software Open Open Source Open Data Indices Open educational resources Open music model Open Web movement Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Open_Source_Initiative&oldid=984180762" Categories: Charities based in California Advocacy groups in the United States Free and open-source software organizations Free culture movement Non-profit organizations based in San Francisco Organizations established in 1998 Hidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titles Pages with citations having bare URLs Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2018 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 18 October 2020, at 17:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement