Script kiddie - Wikipedia Script kiddie From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Term for an unskilled hacker who uses scripts instead of coding on their own This article is part of a series on Computer hacking History Phreaking Cryptovirology Hacking of consumer electronics List of hackers Hacker culture & ethic Hacker Manifesto Black hat Grey hat White hat Hackerspace Hackathon Hacktivism Maker culture Conferences Black Hat Briefings Chaos Communication Congress DEF CON Hackers on Planet Earth Security_BSides ShmooCon Computer crime Crimeware List of computer criminals Script kiddie Hacking tools Forensics OS Vulnerability Exploit Payload Social engineering Kali Practice sites HackThisSite Zone-H Malware Rootkit Backdoor Trojan horse Virus Worm Spyware Ransomware Logic bomb Botnet Keystroke logging HIDS Web shell RCE Computer security Application security Network security Cloud computing security Groups Anonymous Chaos Computer Club Homebrew Computer Club (defunct) Legion of Doom (defunct) Masters of Deception (defunct) LulzSec (defunct) Red and Blue Teams Publications 2600: The Hacker Quarterly Hacker News Nuts and Volts Phrack v t e In programming and hacking cultures, a script kiddie, skiddie,[1] or skid is an unskilled individual who uses scripts or programs, such as a web shell, developed by others to attack computer systems and networks and deface websites. It is generally assumed that most script kiddies are juveniles who lack the ability to write sophisticated programs or exploits on their own and that their objective is to try to impress their friends or gain credit in computer-enthusiast communities.[2] However, the term does not relate to the actual age of the participant. The term is considered to be derogatory. Contents 1 Characteristics 2 Game hacking 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Characteristics[edit] In a Carnegie Mellon report prepared for the U.S. Department of Defense in 2005, script kiddies are defined as The more immature but unfortunately often just as dangerous exploiter of security lapses on the Internet. The typical script kiddy uses existing and frequently well known and easy-to-find techniques and programs or scripts to search for and exploit weaknesses in other computers on the Internet—often randomly and with little regard or perhaps even understanding of the potentially harmful consequences.[3] Script kiddies have at their disposal a large number of effective, easily downloadable programs capable of breaching computers and networks.[2] Such programs have included remote denial-of-service WinNuke,[4] trojans, Back Orifice, NetBus and Sub7[5] vulnerability scanner/injector kit Metasploit[6] and often software intended for legitimate security auditing.[7] Script kiddies vandalize websites both for the thrill of it and to increase their reputation among their peers.[2] Some more malicious script kiddies have used virus toolkits to create and propagate the Anna Kournikova and Love Bug viruses.[1]Script kiddies lack, or are only developing, programming skills sufficient to understand the effects and side effects of their actions. As a result, they leave significant traces which lead to their detection, or directly attack companies which have detection and countermeasures already in place, or in some cases, leave automatic crash reporting turned on.[8][9] One of the most common types of attack utilized by script kiddies involves a form of social engineering, whereby the attacker somehow manipulates or tricks a user into sharing their information. This is often done through the creation of fake websites where users will input their login (a form of phishing), thus allowing the script kiddie access to the account. [10] Game hacking[edit] An elitist subculture of hacking and programming communities, cheat developers, are responsible for the development and maintenance of clients. These individuals must circumvent the target program's security features to become undetected by the anti-cheat. Script kiddies are known to download, slightly modify, then take credit for the entire development of something that a cheat developer may have spent countless hours creating[citation needed]. See also[edit] Black hat hacker Exploit (computer security) Hacker (computer security) Hacktivism Lamer List of convicted computer criminals Web shell, a tool that script kiddies frequently use References[edit] ^ a b Leyden, John (February 21, 2001). "Virus toolkits are s'kiddie menace". The Register. ^ a b c Lemos, Robert (July 12, 2000). "Script kiddies: The Net's cybergangs". ZDNet. Retrieved 2007-04-24. ^ Mead, Nancy R.; Hough, Eric D.; Stehney, Theodore R. III (May 16, 2006). "Security Quality Requirements Engineering (SQUARE) Methodology CMU/SEI-2005-TR-009" (PDF). Carnegie Mellon University, DOD. CERT.org. ^ Klevinsky, T. J.; Laliberte, Scott; Gupta, Ajay (2002). Hack I.T.: security through penetration testing. Addison-Wesley. p. 409. ISBN 978-0-201-71956-7. ^ Granneman, Scott (January 28, 2004). "A Visit from the FBI - We come in peace". The Register. ^ Biancuzzi, Federico (March 27, 2007). "Metasploit 3.0 day". SecurityFocus.com. ^ Rodriguez, Chris; Martinez, Richard (September 2, 2012). "The Growing Hacking Threat to Websites: An Ongoing Commitment to Web Application Security" (PDF). Frost & Sullivan. Retrieved November 30, 2013. ^ Taylor, Josh (August 26, 2010). "Hackers accidentally give Microsoft their code". ZDNet.com.au. Archived from the original on January 20, 2012. ^ Ms. Smith (August 28, 2010). "Error Reporting Oops: Microsoft, Meter Maids and Malicious Code". Privacy and Security Fanatic. Network World. ^ "Script Kiddie: Unskilled Amateur or Dangerous Hackers?". United States Cybersecurity Magazine. 2018-09-14. Retrieved 2019-10-25. Further reading[edit] Tapeworm (2005). 1337 h4x0r h4ndb00k. Sams Publishing. ISBN 0-672-32727-9. The Art of Intrusion: The Real Stories Behind the Exploits of Hackers, Intruders and Deceivers (2005) ISBN 978-0471782667 External links[edit] Honeynet.org - Know Your Enemy (Essay about script kiddies) Cracking the Hacker Mindset Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Script_kiddie&oldid=979970778" Categories: Hacking (computer security) Computing culture Pejorative terms for people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Български Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 23 September 2020, at 20:50 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement