Unix - Wikipedia Unix From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Family of computer operating systems that derive from the original AT&T Unix Unix Evolution of Unix and Unix-like systems Developer Ken Thompson, Dennis Ritchie, Brian Kernighan, Douglas McIlroy, and Joe Ossanna at Bell Labs Written in C and assembly language OS family Unix Working state Current Source model Historically proprietary software, while some Unix projects (including BSD family and illumos) are open-source Initial release Development started in 1969 First manual published internally in November 1971 (1971-11)[1] Announced outside Bell Labs in October 1973 (1973-10)[2] Available in English Kernel type Varies; monolithic, microkernel, hybrid Default user interface Command-line interface and Graphical (Wayland and X Window System; Android SurfaceFlinger; macOS Quartz) License Varies; some versions are proprietary, others are free/open-source software Official website opengroup.org/unix Unix (/ˈjuːnɪks/; trademarked as UNIX) is a family of multitasking, multiuser computer operating systems that derive from the original AT&T Unix, development starting in the 1970s at the Bell Labs research center by Ken Thompson, Dennis Ritchie, and others.[3] Initially intended for use inside the Bell System, AT&T licensed Unix to outside parties in the late 1970s, leading to a variety of both academic and commercial Unix variants from vendors including University of California, Berkeley (BSD), Microsoft (Xenix), Sun Microsystems (SunOS/Solaris), HP/HPE (HP-UX), and IBM (AIX). In the early 1990s, AT&T sold its rights in Unix to Novell, which then sold its Unix business to the Santa Cruz Operation (SCO) in 1995.[4] The UNIX trademark passed to The Open Group, a neutral industry consortium founded in 1996, which allows the use of the mark for certified operating systems that comply with the Single UNIX Specification (SUS). However, Novell continues to own the Unix copyrights, which the SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc. court case (2010) confirmed. Unix systems are characterized by a modular design that is sometimes called the "Unix philosophy". According to this philosophy, the operating system should provide a set of simple tools, each of which performs a limited, well-defined function.[5] A unified filesystem (the Unix filesystem) and an inter-process communication mechanism known as "pipes" serve as the main means of communication,[3] and a shell scripting and command language (the Unix shell) is used to combine the tools to perform complex workflows. Unix distinguishes itself from its predecessors as the first portable operating system: almost the entire operating system is written in the C programming language, which allows Unix to operate on numerous platforms.[6] Contents 1 Overview 2 History 3 Standards 4 Components 5 Impact 5.1 Free Unix and Unix-like variants 5.2 ARPANET 6 Branding 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Overview[edit] Version 7 Unix, the Research Unix ancestor of all modern Unix systems Unix was originally meant to be a convenient platform for programmers developing software to be run on it and on other systems, rather than for non-programmers.[7][8] The system grew larger as the operating system started spreading in academic circles, and as users added their own tools to the system and shared them with colleagues.[9] At first, Unix was not designed to be portable[6] or for multi-tasking.[10] Later, Unix gradually gained portability, multi-tasking and multi-user capabilities in a time-sharing configuration. Unix systems are characterized by various concepts: the use of plain text for storing data; a hierarchical file system; treating devices and certain types of inter-process communication (IPC) as files; and the use of a large number of software tools, small programs that can be strung together through a command-line interpreter using pipes, as opposed to using a single monolithic program that includes all of the same functionality. These concepts are collectively known as the "Unix philosophy". Brian Kernighan and Rob Pike summarize this in The Unix Programming Environment as "the idea that the power of a system comes more from the relationships among programs than from the programs themselves".[11] By the early 1980s, users began seeing Unix as a potential universal operating system, suitable for computers of all sizes.[12][13] The Unix environment and the client–server program model were essential elements in the development of the Internet and the reshaping of computing as centered in networks rather than in individual computers. Both Unix and the C programming language were developed by AT&T and distributed to government and academic institutions, which led to both being ported to a wider variety of machine families than any other operating system. The Unix operating system consists of many libraries and utilities along with the master control program, the kernel. The kernel provides services to start and stop programs, handles the file system and other common "low-level" tasks that most programs share, and schedules access to avoid conflicts when programs try to access the same resource or device simultaneously. To mediate such access, the kernel has special rights, reflected in the distinction of kernel space from user space, the latter being a priority realm where most application programs operate. History[edit] Main article: History of Unix Ken Thompson (sitting) and Dennis Ritchie working together at a PDP-11 The origins of Unix date back to the mid-1960s when the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Bell Labs, and General Electric were developing Multics, a time-sharing operating system for the GE-645 mainframe computer.[14]Multics featured several innovations, but also presented severe problems. Frustrated by the size and complexity of Multics, but not by its goals, individual researchers at Bell Labs started withdrawing from the project. The last to leave were Ken Thompson, Dennis Ritchie, Douglas McIlroy, and Joe Ossanna,[10] who decided to reimplement their experiences in a new project of smaller scale. This new operating system was initially without organizational backing, and also without a name. The new operating system was a single-tasking system.[10] In 1970, the group coined the name Unics for Uniplexed Information and Computing Service as a pun on Multics, which stood for Multiplexed Information and Computer Services. Brian Kernighan takes credit for the idea, but adds that "no one can remember" the origin of the final spelling Unix.[15] Dennis Ritchie,[10] Doug McIlroy,[1] and Peter G. Neumann[16] also credit Kernighan. The operating system was originally written in assembly language, but in 1973, Version 4 Unix was rewritten in C.[10] Version 4 Unix, however, still had many PDP-11 dependent codes, and was not suitable for porting. The first port to another platform was made five years later (1978) for the Interdata 8/32.[17] Bell Labs produced several versions of Unix that are collectively referred to as "Research Unix". In 1975, the first source license for UNIX was sold to Donald B. Gillies at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign Department of Computer Science.[18] UIUC graduate student Greg Chesson, who had worked on the UNIX kernel at Bell Labs, was instrumental in negotiating the terms of the license.[19] During the late 1970s and early 1980s, the influence of Unix in academic circles led to large-scale adoption of Unix (BSD and System V) by commercial startups, which in turn led to Unix fragmenting into multiple, similar but often slightly mutually-incompatible systems including DYNIX, HP-UX, SunOS/Solaris, AIX, and Xenix. In the late 1980s, AT&T Unix System Laboratories and Sun Microsystems developed System V Release 4 (SVR4), which was subsequently adopted by many commercial Unix vendors. In the 1990s, Unix and Unix-like systems grew in popularity and became the operating system of choice for over 90% of the world's top 500 fastest supercomputers,[20] as BSD and Linux distributions were developed through collaboration by a worldwide network of programmers. In 2000, Apple released Darwin, also a Unix system, which became the core of the Mac OS X operating system, later renamed macOS.[21] Unix operating systems are widely used in modern servers, workstations, and mobile devices.[22] Standards[edit] The Common Desktop Environment (CDE), part of the COSE initiative In the late 1980s, an open operating system standardization effort now known as POSIX provided a common baseline for all operating systems; IEEE based POSIX around the common structure of the major competing variants of the Unix system, publishing the first POSIX standard in 1988. In the early 1990s, a separate but very similar effort was started by an industry consortium, the Common Open Software Environment (COSE) initiative, which eventually became the Single UNIX Specification (SUS) administered by The Open Group. Starting in 1998, the Open Group and IEEE started the Austin Group, to provide a common definition of POSIX and the Single UNIX Specification, which, by 2008, had become the Open Group Base Specification. In 1999, in an effort towards compatibility, several Unix system vendors agreed on SVR4's Executable and Linkable Format (ELF) as the standard for binary and object code files. The common format allows substantial binary compatibility among different Unix systems operating on the same CPU architecture. The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard was created to provide a reference directory layout for Unix-like operating systems; it has mainly been used in Linux. Components[edit] See also: List of Unix commands This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Unix" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Unix system is composed of several components that were originally packaged together. By including the development environment, libraries, documents and the portable, modifiable source code for all of these components, in addition to the kernel of an operating system, Unix was a self-contained software system. This was one of the key reasons it emerged as an important teaching and learning tool and has had such a broad influence.[according to whom?] The inclusion of these components did not make the system large – the original V7 UNIX distribution, consisting of copies of all of the compiled binaries plus all of the source code and documentation occupied less than 10 MB and arrived on a single nine-track magnetic tape. The printed documentation, typeset from the online sources, was contained in two volumes. The names and filesystem locations of the Unix components have changed substantially across the history of the system. Nonetheless, the V7 implementation is considered by many[who?] to have the canonical early structure: Kernel – source code in /usr/sys, composed of several sub-components: conf – configuration and machine-dependent parts, including boot code dev – device drivers for control of hardware (and some pseudo-hardware) sys – operating system "kernel", handling memory management, process scheduling, system calls, etc. h – header files, defining key structures within the system and important system-specific invariables Development environment – early versions of Unix contained a development environment sufficient to recreate the entire system from source code: cc – C language compiler (first appeared in V3 Unix) as – machine-language assembler for the machine ld – linker, for combining object files lib – object-code libraries (installed in /lib or /usr/lib). libc, the system library with C run-time support, was the primary library, but there have always been additional libraries for things such as mathematical functions (libm) or database access. V7 Unix introduced the first version of the modern "Standard I/O" library stdio as part of the system library. Later implementations increased the number of libraries significantly. make – build manager (introduced in PWB/UNIX), for effectively automating the build process include – header files for software development, defining standard interfaces and system invariants Other languages – V7 Unix contained a Fortran-77 compiler, a programmable arbitrary-precision calculator (bc, dc), and the awk scripting language; later versions and implementations contain many other language compilers and toolsets. Early BSD releases included Pascal tools, and many modern Unix systems also include the GNU Compiler Collection as well as or instead of a proprietary compiler system. Other tools – including an object-code archive manager (ar), symbol-table lister (nm), compiler-development tools (e.g. lex & yacc), and debugging tools. Commands – Unix makes little distinction between commands (user-level programs) for system operation and maintenance (e.g. cron), commands of general utility (e.g. grep), and more general-purpose applications such as the text formatting and typesetting package. Nonetheless, some major categories are: sh – the "shell" programmable command-line interpreter, the primary user interface on Unix before window systems appeared, and even afterward (within a "command window"). Utilities – the core toolkit of the Unix command set, including cp, ls, grep, find and many others. Subcategories include: System utilities – administrative tools such as mkfs, fsck, and many others. User utilities – environment management tools such as passwd, kill, and others. Document formatting – Unix systems were used from the outset for document preparation and typesetting systems, and included many related programs such as nroff, troff, tbl, eqn, refer, and pic. Some modern Unix systems also include packages such as TeX and Ghostscript. Graphics – the plot subsystem provided facilities for producing simple vector plots in a device-independent format, with device-specific interpreters to display such files. Modern Unix systems also generally include X11 as a standard windowing system and GUI, and many support OpenGL. Communications – early Unix systems contained no inter-system communication, but did include the inter-user communication programs mail and write. V7 introduced the early inter-system communication system UUCP, and systems beginning with BSD release 4.1c included TCP/IP utilities. Documentation – Unix was the first[citation needed] operating system to include all of its documentation online in machine-readable form. The documentation included: man – manual pages for each command, library component, system call, header file, etc. doc – longer documents detailing major subsystems, such as the C language and troff Impact[edit] See also: Unix-like This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Unix" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie, principal developers of Research Unix Photo from USENIX 1984, including Dennis Ritchie (center) Plan 9 from Bell Labs extends Unix design principles and was developed as a successor to Unix. The Unix system had a significant impact on other operating systems. It achieved its reputation by its interactivity, by providing the software at a nominal fee for educational use, by running on inexpensive hardware, and by being easy to adapt and move to different machines. Unix was originally written in assembly language, but was soon rewritten in C, a high-level programming language.[23] Although this followed the lead of Multics and Burroughs, it was Unix that popularized the idea. Unix had a drastically simplified file model compared to many contemporary operating systems: treating all kinds of files as simple byte arrays. The file system hierarchy contained machine services and devices (such as printers, terminals, or disk drives), providing a uniform interface, but at the expense of occasionally requiring additional mechanisms such as ioctl and mode flags to access features of the hardware that did not fit the simple "stream of bytes" model. The Plan 9 operating system pushed this model even further and eliminated the need for additional mechanisms. Unix also popularized the hierarchical file system with arbitrarily nested subdirectories, originally introduced by Multics. Other common operating systems of the era had ways to divide a storage device into multiple directories or sections, but they had a fixed number of levels, often only one level. Several major proprietary operating systems eventually added recursive subdirectory capabilities also patterned after Multics. DEC's RSX-11M's "group, user" hierarchy evolved into VMS directories, CP/M's volumes evolved into MS-DOS 2.0+ subdirectories, and HP's MPE group.account hierarchy and IBM's SSP and OS/400 library systems were folded into broader POSIX file systems. Making the command interpreter an ordinary user-level program, with additional commands provided as separate programs, was another Multics innovation popularized by Unix. The Unix shell used the same language for interactive commands as for scripting (shell scripts – there was no separate job control language like IBM's JCL). Since the shell and OS commands were "just another program", the user could choose (or even write) their own shell. New commands could be added without changing the shell itself. Unix's innovative command-line syntax for creating modular chains of producer-consumer processes (pipelines) made a powerful programming paradigm (coroutines) widely available. Many later command-line interpreters have been inspired by the Unix shell. A fundamental simplifying assumption of Unix was its focus on newline-delimited text for nearly all file formats. There were no "binary" editors in the original version of Unix – the entire system was configured using textual shell command scripts. The common denominator in the I/O system was the byte – unlike "record-based" file systems. The focus on text for representing nearly everything made Unix pipes especially useful and encouraged the development of simple, general tools that could be easily combined to perform more complicated ad hoc tasks. The focus on text and bytes made the system far more scalable and portable than other systems. Over time, text-based applications have also proven popular in application areas, such as printing languages (PostScript, ODF), and at the application layer of the Internet protocols, e.g., FTP, SMTP, HTTP, SOAP, and SIP. Unix popularized a syntax for regular expressions that found widespread use. The Unix programming interface became the basis for a widely implemented operating system interface standard (POSIX, see above). The C programming language soon spread beyond Unix, and is now ubiquitous in systems and applications programming. Early Unix developers were important in bringing the concepts of modularity and reusability into software engineering practice, spawning a "software tools" movement. Over time, the leading developers of Unix (and programs that ran on it) established a set of cultural norms for developing software, norms which became as important and influential as the technology of Unix itself; this has been termed the Unix philosophy. The TCP/IP networking protocols were quickly implemented on the Unix versions widely used on relatively inexpensive computers, which contributed to the Internet explosion of worldwide real-time connectivity, and which formed the basis for implementations on many other platforms. The Unix policy of extensive on-line documentation and (for many years) ready access to all system source code raised programmer expectations, and contributed to the launch of the free software movement in 1983. Free Unix and Unix-like variants[edit] See also: Operating system § Unix and Unix-like operating systems Console screenshots of Debian (top, a popular Linux distribution) and FreeBSD (bottom, a popular Unix-like operating system) In 1983, Richard Stallman announced the GNU (short for "GNU's Not Unix") project, an ambitious effort to create a free software Unix-like system; "free" in the sense that everyone who received a copy would be free to use, study, modify, and redistribute it. The GNU project's own kernel development project, GNU Hurd, had not yet produced a working kernel, but in 1991 Linus Torvalds released the kernel Linux as free software under the GNU General Public License. In addition to their use in the GNU operating system, many GNU packages – such as the GNU Compiler Collection (and the rest of the GNU toolchain), the GNU C library and the GNU core utilities – have gone on to play central roles in other free Unix systems as well. Linux distributions, consisting of the Linux kernel and large collections of compatible software have become popular both with individual users and in business. Popular distributions include Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Fedora, SUSE Linux Enterprise, openSUSE, Debian GNU/Linux, Ubuntu, Linux Mint, Mandriva Linux, Slackware Linux, Arch Linux and Gentoo.[24] A free derivative of BSD Unix, 386BSD, was released in 1992 and led to the NetBSD and FreeBSD projects. With the 1994 settlement of a lawsuit brought against the University of California and Berkeley Software Design Inc. (USL v. BSDi) by Unix System Laboratories, it was clarified that Berkeley had the right to distribute BSD Unix for free if it so desired. Since then, BSD Unix has been developed in several different product branches, including OpenBSD and DragonFly BSD. Linux and BSD are increasingly filling the market needs traditionally served by proprietary Unix operating systems, as well as expanding into new markets such as the consumer desktop and mobile and embedded devices. Because of the modular design of the Unix model, sharing components is relatively common; consequently, most or all Unix and Unix-like systems include at least some BSD code, and some systems also include GNU utilities in their distributions. In a 1999 interview, Dennis Ritchie voiced his opinion that Linux and BSD operating systems are a continuation of the basis of the Unix design, and are derivatives of Unix:[25] I think the Linux phenomenon is quite delightful, because it draws so strongly on the basis that Unix provided. Linux seems to be the among the healthiest of the direct Unix derivatives, though there are also the various BSD systems as well as the more official offerings from the workstation and mainframe manufacturers. In the same interview, he states that he views both Unix and Linux as "the continuation of ideas that were started by Ken and me and many others, many years ago".[25] OpenSolaris was the free software counterpart to Solaris developed by Sun Microsystems, which included a CDDL-licensed kernel and a primarily GNU userland. However, Oracle discontinued the project upon their acquisition of Sun, which prompted a group of former Sun employees and members of the OpenSolaris community to fork OpenSolaris into the illumos kernel. As of 2014, illumos remains the only active open-source System V derivative. ARPANET[edit] In May 1975, RFC 681 described the development of Network Unix by the Center for Advanced Computation at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. The system was said to "present several interesting capabilities as an ARPANET mini-host". At the time Unix required a license from Bell Laboratories that at $20,000(US) was very expensive for non-university users, while an educational license cost just $150. It was noted that Bell was "open to suggestions" for an ARPANET-wide license. Specific features found beneficial were the local processing facilities, compilers, editors, a document preparation system, efficient file system and access control, mountable and unmountable volumes, unified treatment of peripherals as special files, integration of the network control program (NCP) within the Unix file system, treatment of network connections as special files that can be accessed through standard Unix I/O calls, closing of all files on program exit, and the decision to be "desirable to minimize the amount of code added to the basic Unix kernel". Branding[edit] See also: List of Unix systems Promotional license plate by Digital Equipment Corporation HP9000 workstation running HP-UX, a certified Unix operating system In October 1993, Novell, the company that owned the rights to the Unix System V source at the time, transferred the trademarks of Unix to the X/Open Company (now The Open Group),[26] and in 1995 sold the related business operations to Santa Cruz Operation (SCO).[27] Whether Novell also sold the copyrights to the actual software was the subject of a federal lawsuit in 2006, SCO v. Novell, which Novell won. The case was appealed, but on August 30, 2011, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed the trial decisions, closing the case.[28] Unix vendor SCO Group Inc. accused Novell of slander of title. The present owner of the trademark UNIX is The Open Group, an industry standards consortium. Only systems fully compliant with and certified to the Single UNIX Specification qualify as "UNIX" (others are called "Unix-like"). By decree of The Open Group, the term "UNIX" refers more to a class of operating systems than to a specific implementation of an operating system; those operating systems which meet The Open Group's Single UNIX Specification should be able to bear the UNIX 98 or UNIX 03 trademarks today, after the operating system's vendor pays a substantial certification fee and annual trademark royalties to The Open Group.[29] Systems that have been licensed to use the UNIX trademark include AIX,[30] EulerOS,[31] HP-UX,[32] Inspur K-UX,[33] IRIX,[34] macOS,[35] Solaris,[36] Tru64 UNIX (formerly "Digital UNIX", or OSF/1),[37] and z/OS.[38] Notably, EulerOS and Inspur K-UX are Linux distributions certified as UNIX 03 compliant.[39][40] Sometimes a representation like Un*x, *NIX, or *N?X is used to indicate all operating systems similar to Unix. This comes from the use of the asterisk (*) and the question mark characters as wildcard indicators in many utilities. This notation is also used to describe other Unix-like systems that have not met the requirements for UNIX branding from the Open Group. The Open Group requests that UNIX is always used as an adjective followed by a generic term such as system to help avoid the creation of a genericized trademark. Unix was the original formatting,[disputed – discuss] but the usage of UNIX remains widespread because it was once typeset in small caps (Unix). According to Dennis Ritchie, when presenting the original Unix paper to the third Operating Systems Symposium of the American Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), "we had a new typesetter and troff had just been invented and we were intoxicated by being able to produce small caps".[41] Many of the operating system's predecessors and contemporaries used all-uppercase lettering, so many people wrote the name in upper case due to force of habit. It is not an acronym.[42] Trademark names can be registered by different entities in different countries and trademark laws in some countries allow the same trademark name to be controlled by two different entities if each entity uses the trademark in easily distinguishable categories. The result is that Unix has been used as a brand name for various products including bookshelves, ink pens, bottled glue, diapers, hair driers and food containers.[43] Several plural forms of Unix are used casually to refer to multiple brands of Unix and Unix-like systems. Most common is the conventional Unixes, but Unices, treating Unix as a Latin noun of the third declension, is also popular. The pseudo-Anglo-Saxon plural form Unixen is not common, although occasionally seen. Sun Microsystems, developer of the Solaris variant, has asserted that the term Unix is itself plural, referencing its many implementations.[44] See also[edit] Comparison of operating systems and free and proprietary software List of operating systems, Unix systems, and Unix commands Market share of operating systems Timeline of operating systems Plan 9 from Bell Labs Unix time Year 2038 problem References[edit] ^ a b McIlroy, M. D. (1987). A Research Unix reader: annotated excerpts from the Programmer's Manual, 1971–1986 (PDF) (Technical report). CSTR. Bell Labs. 139. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 November 2017. ^ Ritchie, D. M.; Thompson, K. (1974). "The UNIX Time-Sharing System" (PDF). Communications of the ACM. 17 (7): 365–375. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.118.1214. doi:10.1145/361011.361061. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 June 2015. ^ a b Ritchie, D.M.; Thompson, K. (July 1978). "The UNIX Time-Sharing System". Bell System Tech. J. 57 (6): 1905–1929. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.112.595. doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1978.tb02136.x. Retrieved December 9, 2012. ^ "Novell Completes Sale of UnixWare Business to The Santa Cruz Operation | Micro Focus". www.novell.com. Archived from the original on 20 December 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2015. ^ Raymond, Eric (19 September 2003). The Art of Unix Programming. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0-13-142901-7. Archived from the original on 12 February 2009. Retrieved 9 February 2009. ^ a b Ritchie, Dennis M. (January 1993). "The Development of the C Language" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 June 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2015. ^ Raymond, Eric Steven (2003). "The Elements of Operating-System Style". The Art of Unix Programming. Retrieved August 16, 2020. ^ "Tandy/Radio Shack Book: Whole Earth Software Catalog". 1984. UNIX was created by software developers for software developers, to give themselves an environment they could completely manipulate. ^ Powers, Shelley; Peek, Jerry; O'Reilly, Tim; Loukides, Mike (2002). Unix Power Tools. ISBN 978-0-596-00330-2. ^ a b c d e Ritchie, Dennis M. "The Evolution of the Unix Time-sharing System" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 April 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2017. ^ Kernighan, Brian W. Pike, Rob. The UNIX Programming Environment. 1984. viii ^ Fiedler, Ryan (October 1983). "The Unix Tutorial / Part 3: Unix in the Microcomputer Marketplace". BYTE. p. 132. Retrieved January 30, 2015. ^ "Tandy/Radio Shack Book: Whole Earth Software Catalog". 1984. The best thing about UNIX is its portability. UNIX ports across a full range of hardware—from the single-user $5000 IBM PC to the $5 million Cray. For the first time, the point of stability becomes the software environment, not the hardware architecture; UNIX transcends changes in hardware technology, so programs written for the UNIX environment can move into the next generation of hardware. ^ Stuart, Brian L. (2009). Principles of operating systems: design & applications. Boston, Massachusetts: Thompson Learning. p. 23. ISBN 978-1-4188-3769-3. ^ Dolya, Aleksey (29 July 2003). "Interview with Brian Kernighan". Linux Journal. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. ^ Rik Farrow. "An Interview with Peter G. Neumann" (PDF). ;login:. 42 (4): 38. That then led to Unics (the castrated one-user Multics, so- called due to Brian Kernighan) later becoming UNIX (probably as a result of AT&T lawyers). ^ "Portability of C Programs and the UNIX System". Bell-labs.com. Retrieved August 24, 2018. ^ Thompson, Ken (16 September 2014). "personal communication, Ken Thompson to Donald W. Gillies". UBC ECE Website. Archived from the original on 22 March 2016. ^ Chesson, Greg (12 November 2014). "Personal Communication, Greg Chesson to Donald W. Gillies". UBC ECE Website. Archived from the original on 22 March 2016. ^ "Operating system Family - Systems share". Top 500 project. ^ "Loading". Developer.apple.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 22 August 2012. ^ "Unix's Revenge". asymco. 29 September 2010. Archived from the original on 9 November 2010. Retrieved 9 November 2010. ^ Ritchie, Dennis (1979). "The Evolution of the Unix Time-sharing System". Bell Labs. Archived from the original on 11 June 2015. Retrieved 30 April 2016. Perhaps the most important watershed occurred during 1973, when the operating system kernel was rewritten in C. ^ "Distrowatch: Top Ten Distributions". ^ a b Benet, Manuel (1999). "Interview With Dennis M. Ritchie". LinuxFocus.org. Archived from the original on 4 January 2018. Retrieved 16 August 2020. ^ Chuck Karish (October 12, 1993). "The name UNIX is now the property of X/Open". Newsgroup: comp.std.unix. Usenet: 29hug3INN4qt@rodan.UU.NET. Retrieved February 21, 2020. ^ "HP, Novell and SCO To Deliver High-Volume UNIX OS With Advanced Network And Enterprise Services". Novell.com. September 20, 1995. Archived from the original on January 23, 2007. Retrieved November 9, 2010. ^ Jones, Pamela. "SCO Files Docketing Statement and We Find Out What Its Appeal Will Be About". Groklaw. Groklaw.net. Retrieved April 12, 2011. ^ The Open Group. "The Open Brand Fee Schedule". Archived from the original on December 31, 2011. Retrieved December 26, 2011. The right to use the UNIX Trademark requires the Licensee to pay to The Open Group an additional annual fee, calculated in accordance with the fee table set out below. ^ The Open Group. "AIX 6 Operating System V6.1.2 with SP1 or later certification". Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. ^ The Open Group (September 8, 2016). "Huawei EulerOS 2.0 certification". ^ The Open Group. "HP-UX 11i V3 Release B.11.31 or later certification". Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. ^ The Open Group. "Inspur K-UX 2.0 certification". Archived from the original on July 9, 2014. ^ The Open Group. "IRIX 6.5.28 with patches (4605 and 7029) certification". Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. ^ "macOS version 10.12 Sierra on Intel-based Mac computers". The Open Group. Archived from the original on October 2, 2016. ^ The Open Group. "Oracle Solaris 11 FCS and later certification". Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. ^ Bonnie Talerico. "Hewlett-Packard Company Conformance Statement". The Open Group. Archived from the original on December 10, 2015. Retrieved December 8, 2015. ^ Vivian W. Morabito. "IBM Corporation Conformance Statement". The Open Group. Retrieved January 21, 2018. ^ Peng Shen. "Huawei Conformance Statement". The Open Group. Retrieved January 22, 2020. ^ Peng Shen. "Huawei Conformance Statement: Commands and Utilities V4". The Open Group. Retrieved January 22, 2020. ^ Raymond, Eric S. (ed.). "Unix". The Jargon File. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved November 9, 2010. ^ Troy, Douglas (1990). UNIX Systems. Computing Fundamentals. Benjamin/Cumming Publishing Company. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-201-19827-0. ^ "Autres Unix, autres moeurs (OtherUnix)". Bell Laboratories. April 1, 2000. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017. Retrieved January 3, 2018. ^ "History of Solaris" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on March 18, 2017. UNIX is plural. It is not one operating system but, many implementations of an idea that originated in 1965. Further reading[edit] General Ritchie, D.M.; Thompson, K. (July–August 1978). "The UNIX Time-Sharing System". Bell System Technical Journal. 57 (6). Archived from the original on November 3, 2010. "UNIX History". www.levenez.com. Retrieved March 17, 2005. "AIX, FreeBSD, HP-UX, Linux, Solaris, Tru64". UNIXguide.net. Retrieved March 17, 2005. "Linux Weekly News, February 21, 2002". lwn.net. Retrieved April 7, 2006. Lions, John: Lions' "Commentary on the Sixth Edition UNIX Operating System". with Source Code, Peer-to-Peer Communications, 1996; ISBN 1-57398-013-7 Books Salus, Peter H.: A Quarter Century of UNIX, Addison Wesley, June 1, 1994; ISBN 0-201-54777-5 Television Computer Chronicles (1985). "UNIX". Computer Chronicles (1989). "Unix". Talks Ken Thompson (2019). "VCF East 2019 -- Brian Kernighan interviews Ken Thompson" (Interview). Dr Marshall Kirk McKusick (2006). History of the Berkeley Software Distributions (three one-hour lectures). External links[edit] Unixat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata The UNIX Standard, at The Open Group. AT&T Archives: The UNIX Operating System on YouTube The Evolution of the Unix Time-sharing System at the Wayback Machine (archived April 8, 2015) The Creation of the UNIX Operating System at the Wayback Machine (archived April 2, 2014) The Unix Tree: files from historic releases Unix at Curlie The Unix 1st Edition Manuals. 1982 film about Unix featuring Dennis Ritchie, Ken Thompson, Brian Kernighan, Alfred Aho, and more audio bsdtalk170 - Marshall Kirk McKusick at DCBSDCon -- on history of tcp/ip (in BSD) -- abridgement of the three lectures on the history of BSD. A History of UNIX before Berkeley: UNIX Evolution: 1975-1984 BYTE Magazine, September 1986: UNIX and the MC68000 – a software perspective on the MC68000 CPU architecture and UNIX compatibility Request a login to try some Unix systems on vintage hardware at Living Computers: Museum + Labs. v t e Unix and Unix-like operating systems and compatibility layers Operating systems BSD 386BSD FreeBSD NetBSD OpenBSD DragonFly BSD NeXTSTEP Darwin macOS iOS watchOS tvOS audioOS iPadOS SunOS Ultrix Coherent GNU Linux Android Chrome OS LynxOS MINIX QNX BlackBerry 10 Research Unix System V A/UX AIX HP-UX illumos IRIX OpenServer Solaris Tru64 UNIX UnixWare Xenix more... Compatibility layers Eunice Interix MachTen Microsoft POSIX subsystem MKS Toolkit P.I.P.S. UNIX System Services UserLAnd Technologies Windows Services for UNIX Windows Subsystem for Linux Italics indicate discontinued branches. Category Commons Book v t e Unix command-line interface programs and shell builtins File system cat chmod chown chgrp cksum cmp cp dd du df file fuser ln ls mkdir mv pax pwd rm rmdir split tee touch type umask Processes at bg crontab fg kill nice ps time User environment env exit logname mesg talk tput uname who write Text processing awk basename comm csplit cut diff dirname ed ex fold head iconv join m4 more nl paste patch printf sed sort strings tail tr uniq vi wc xargs Shell builtins alias cd echo test unset wait Searching find grep Documentation man Software development ar ctags lex make nm strip yacc Miscellaneous bc cal expr lp od sleep true and false Categories Standard Unix programs Unix SUS2008 utilities List v t e Time-sharing operating systems Time-sharing system evolution BBN Time-Sharing System Berkeley Timesharing System Burroughs MCP CDC Kronos Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) COS Cray Time Sharing System (CTSS) DTSS EMAS ITS LTSS MCTSS MTS Multics MUSIC/SP NLTSS NOS NOS/VE OpenVMS ORVYL and WYLBUR OS4000 Pick RSTS/E TENEX TSO TSOS TOPS-10 TOPS-20 TSS TSS/8 Unix UTS VM VP/CSS VPS/VM WAITS Category v t e Operating systems General Advocacy Comparison Forensic engineering History Hobbyist development List Timeline Usage share Variants Disk operating system Distributed operating system Embedded operating system Mobile operating system Network operating system Object-oriented operating system Real-time operating system Supercomputer operating system Kernel Architectures Exokernel Hybrid Microkernel Monolithic vkernel Rump kernel Unikernel Components Device driver Loadable kernel module Microkernel User space Process management Concepts Computer multitasking (Cooperative, Preemptive) Context switch Interrupt IPC Process Process control block Real-time Thread Time-sharing Scheduling algorithms Fixed-priority preemptive Multilevel feedback queue Round-robin Shortest job next Memory management, resource protection Bus error General protection fault Memory protection Paging Protection ring Segmentation fault Virtual memory Storage access, file systems Boot loader Defragmentation Device file File attribute Inode Journal Partition Virtual file system Virtual tape library Supporting concepts API Computer network HAL Live CD Live USB OS shell CLI GUI 3D GUI NUI TUI VUI ZUI PXE Authority control BNF: cb11968227m (data) GND: 4061835-3 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unix&oldid=991253547" Categories: Unix 1969 software Operating system families Time-sharing operating systems Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2018 Use American English from August 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2015 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from September 2019 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Curlie links Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers Pages using RFC magic links Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎ Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban. Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Саха тыла Sardu Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча/tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links This page was last edited on 29 November 2020, at 03:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement