Corel Ventura - Wikipedia Corel Ventura From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Corel Ventura" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Corel Ventura Screenshot of Corel Ventura 10 Developer(s) Corel Initial release 1986; 34 years ago (1986) Final release 10 / 2002; 18 years ago (2002) Operating system GEM, OS/2, Windows, "classic" Mac OS Available in English Type Desktop publishing License Commercial proprietary software Website https://www.coreldraw.com/en/pages/old-brands/corel-ventura/ Ventura Publisher was the first popular desktop publishing package for IBM PC compatible computers running the GEM extension to the DOS operating system. The software was originally developed by Ventura Software, a small software company founded by John Meyer, Don Heiskell, and Lee Jay Lorenzen, all of whom met while working at Digital Research. It ran under an included run-time copy of Digital Research's GEM. Contents 1 History 2 Notes 3 See also 4 External links History[edit] The first version of Ventura Publisher was released in 1986, and distributed worldwide exclusively by Xerox until Ventura Software sold the source code to the former company in 1990. The original Ventura Software ceased operations in February 1990, and a new Ventura Software Inc. was formed at that time, an affiliated company of Xerox. The developers from the original company worked with the new Xerox Ventura Software company to produce Version 3.0 Gold. This was released in late 1990. Besides DOS/GEM, it was also available for Win16, Mac, and OS/2. Xerox Ventura Publisher running on GEM The three founders of the original Ventura Software no longer worked on the product after November 1990. Version 4.0 was released in 1991. The last version released by Ventura Software Inc. was 4.1.1 in 1993. Ventura Publisher had some text editing and line drawing capabilities of its own, but it was designed to interface with a wide variety of word processing and graphics programs rather than to supplant them. To that end, text was stored in, loaded from, and saved back to word processor files in the native formats of a variety of word processors, including WordPerfect, Wordstar, and early versions of Microsoft Word, rather than being incorporated into the chapter files. This allowed users to continue using their favorite word processors for major text changes, spelling checks, and so forth. Paragraphs other than default body text were tagged with descriptive tagnames that were entirely user-defined, and characters and attributes that have no native equivalent in a given word processor were represented with standardized sequences of characters. When working with the files outside of Ventura Publisher, these paragraph tags and special character and attribute codes could be freely changed, the same as any other text. These tags looked very much like HTML tags. Ventura Publisher was the first major typesetting program to incorporate the concept of an implicit "underlying page" frame, and one of the first to incorporate a strong "style sheet" concept. It produced documents with a high degree of internal consistency, unless specifically overridden by the user. Its concepts of free-flowing text, paragraph tagging, and codes for attributes and special characters anticipated similar concepts inherent in HTML and XML. Likewise, its concept of "publication" files that tie together "chapter" files gave it the ability to handle documents hundreds (or even thousands) of pages in length as easily as a four-page newsletter. The major strengths of the original DOS/GEM edition of Ventura Publisher were: Its ability to run, with reasonable response times, on a wide range of hardware (including 8086 and 80286-based computers) Its ability to produce, by default, documents with a high degree of internal consistency Its automatic re-export of text to word-processor-native formats Its ability to print to a wide variety of devices, including PostScript, PCL, and InterPress laser printers and imagesetters, as well as certain popular dot-matrix printers. The application was acquired by Corel in 1993. It was repackaged and soon released as Corel Ventura 4.2 without any major change in the application, other than to drop all support for platforms other than Microsoft Windows. The first real Corel version was 5.0, released in 1994, and made fundamental changes to both user interface and document structure. Because of this, and because of escalating requirements of the various Corel versions, the original DOS/GEM edition still has a small number of die-hard users. The application was rewritten for the Win32 platform and was released in 1996, labeled Corel Ventura 7 (instead of 6) so that it would match the version number of CorelDRAW. Corel Ventura 8 was released in 1998. The last published version was Corel Ventura 10 in 2002 (last update February 2003); it reportedly runs in Windows 10 under compatibility mode with some functional limitations after workarounds, and on Linux via Wine (verified in April 2020). As an application with strengths in more structured documents, its main competitors were FrameMaker, InDesign and QuarkXPress. Notes[edit] "Desktop Publishing Using Ventura ™ on the IBM-PC". Don Busché, Saddleback College, with Bernice Glenn, Desktop Publishing and Design Consultant. 1989 Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632. Paperback, 270 pages; includes monochromatic illustrations and 5 1/4" floppy data disk. ISBN 0-13-202235-4 James Cavuoto and Jesse Berst (1990). Inside Xerox Ventura Publisher. Ventana Press. ISBN 9780940087613. See also[edit] QuarkXPress Adobe FrameMaker Adobe InDesign Adobe PageMaker Microsoft Publisher Ready,Set,Go! Scribus Serif PagePlus Quark CopyDesk Quark Publishing System Timeworks Publisher / Publish-It! / KeyPublisher (an inexpensive Ventura clone that ran under GEM on the PC or the Atari ST, and did not require a hard drive) XTension External links[edit] Ventura Publisher brochure v t e Desktop publishing software Free software Scribus LyX LibreOffice Draw Software freeware PagePlus SE PDF-XChange Fatpaint (Cloud-based) Proprietary software Acrobat FrameMaker InDesign PageMaker Affinity Publisher Calamus Corel Ventura MadCap Flare Microsoft Publisher PagePlus Pages PageStream QuarkXPress Timeworks Publisher See also Web design Mobile publishing Electronic publishing Printing List of PDF software Comparison of e-book readers Category Comparison List Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Corel_Ventura&oldid=968106916" Categories: 1986 software Corel software Desktop publishing software GEM software DTP for Windows Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from July 2020 All articles lacking sources Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Català Deutsch Eesti Italiano Nederlands Polski Русский Svenska Türkçe Edit links This page was last edited on 17 July 2020, at 08:12 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement