Zooming user interface - Wikipedia Zooming user interface From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Zooming User Interface) Jump to navigation Jump to search Example of a ZUI In computing, a zooming user interface or zoomable user interface (ZUI, pronounced zoo-ee) is a graphical environment where users can change the scale of the viewed area in order to see more detail or less, and browse through different documents. A ZUI is a type of graphical user interface (GUI). Information elements appear directly on an infinite virtual desktop (usually created using vector graphics), instead of in windows. Users can pan across the virtual surface in two dimensions and zoom into objects of interest. For example, as you zoom into a text object it may be represented as a small dot, then a thumbnail of a page of text, then a full-sized page and finally a magnified view of the page. ZUIs use zooming as the main metaphor for browsing through hyperlinked or multivariate information.Objects present inside a zoomed page can in turn be zoomed themselves to reveal further detail, allowing for recursive nesting and an arbitrary level of zoom. When the level of detail present in the resized object is changed to fit the relevant information into the current size, instead of being a proportional view of the whole object, it's called semantic zooming.[1] Some consider the ZUI paradigm as a flexible and realistic successor to the traditional windowing GUI, being a Post-WIMP interface.[citation needed] History[edit] Ivan Sutherland presented the first program for zooming through and creating graphical structures with constraints and instancing, on a CRT in his Sketchpad program in 1962.[2] A more general interface was done by the Architecture Machine Group in the 1970s at MIT. Hand tracking, touchscreen, joystick, and voice control was employed to control an infinite plane of projects, documents, contacts, video and interactive programs. One of the instances of this project was called Spatial Dataland.[3] Another GUI environment of the 70's, which used the zooming idea was Smalltalk at Xerox Parc, which had infinite "desktops" (only later coined as such by Apple Computer), that could be zoomed in upon from a birds eye view after the user had recognized a miniature of the window setup for the project. The longest running effort to create a ZUI has been the Pad++ project started by Ken Perlin, Jim Hollan, and Ben Bederson at New York University and continued at the University of New Mexico under Hollan's direction. After Pad++, Bederson developed Jazz, then Piccolo,[4] and now Piccolo2D[5] at the University of Maryland, College Park, which is maintained in Java and C#. More recent ZUI efforts include Archy by the late Jef Raskin, ZVTM developed at INRIA (which uses the Sigma lens[6] technique), and the simple ZUI of the Squeak Smalltalk programming environment and language. The term ZUI itself was coined by Franklin Servan-Schreiber and Tom Grauman while they worked together at the Sony Research Laboratories. They were developing the first Zooming User Interface library based on Java 1.0, in partnership with Prof. Ben Bederson, University of New Mexico, and Prof. Ken Perlin, New York University. GeoPhoenix, a Cambridge, MA, startup associated with the MIT Media Lab, founded by Julian Orbanes, Adriana Guzman, Max Riesenhuber, released the first mass-marketed commercial Zoomspace in 2002-3 on the Sony CLIÉ PDA handheld, with Ken Miura of Sony In 2006, Hillcrest Labs introduced the HoME television navigation system, the first graphical, zooming interface for television.[7] In 2007, Microsoft's Live Labs has released a zooming UI for web browsing called Microsoft Live Labs Deepfish for the Windows Mobile 5 platform. Apple's iPhone (premiered June 2007) uses a stylized form of ZUI, in which panning and zooming are performed through a touch interface. A more fully realised ZUI is present in the iOS home screen (as of iOS 7), with zooming from the homescreen into folders and finally in to apps. The photo app zooms out from a single photo to moments, to collections, to years. And similarly in the calendar app with day, month and year views.[8] It is not a full ZUI implementation since these operations are applied to bounded spaces (such as web pages or photos) and have a limited range of zooming and panning. Franklin Servan-Schreiber founded Zoomorama, based on work he did at the Sony Research Laboratories in the mid-nineties. The Zooming Browser for Collage of High Resolution Images was released in Alpha in October 2007. Zoomorama's browser is all Flash-based. Development of this project was stopped in 2010, but many examples are still available on the site. In 2017, bigpictu.re offers an infinite notepad (infinite both in panning and zooming) as a web-application based on one of the first ZUI open-source libraries.[9] Also, Zircle UI offers an Open Source UI Library that uses zoomable navigation and circular shapes. [10]. References[edit] ^ Peter Bright. "Hands-on with Windows 8: A PC operating system for the tablet age". Ars Technica. ^ Sketchpad: A man-machine graphical communication system ^ Dataland: the MIT's '70s media room concept that influenced the Mac ^ Piccolo (formerly Jazz): ZUI toolkit for Java and C# (no longer actively maintained) ^ Piccolo2D: Piccolo's successor. ^ "Sigma lenses: focus-context transitions combining space, time and translucence", Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 2008 ^ Popular Mechanics 2007. Retrieved November 11, 2011. Glen Derene. Wii 2.0: Loop remote lets you click by gesture. ^ https://www.apple.com/ios/ios7/ ^ bigpicture.js, a library that allows infinite panning and infinite zooming 2015. bigpicture.js ^ https://zircleui.github.io/zircleUI/ External links[edit] The Economist 2012 article about ZUI v t e Widgets Command input Adjustment handle Button Context menu Drop-down list Hamburger button Menu Pie menu Data input-output Checkbox Color picker Combo box Cycle button Date picker Grid view Light switch List box List builder Radio button Scrollbar Search box Slider Spinner Text box Informational Balloon help Head-up display in computing Head-up display in video games Icon Infobar Label Loading screen Progress indicator Progress bar Splash screen Throbber Sidebar Status bar Toast Tooltip Containers Accordion Tree view Client-side decoration Disclosure widget Frame / Fieldset Menu bar Panel Popover Ribbon Tab Toolbar Window Window decoration Workspace Navigational Address bar Breadcrumb navigation Hyperlink Navigation bar Virtual desktop Special windows Alert dialog box Dialog box File dialog Inspector window Modal window Palette window Related concepts File viewer List of graphical user interface elements Layout manager Look and feel Mouseover Widget toolkit WIMP Zoomable user interface v t e User interfaces Natural-language user interfaces Chatbot Dialogue system Voice user interfaces Conversational user interface Virtual assistant Voice search Graphical user interfaces Widgets Zooming user interface 3D GUI Touch user interfaces Multi-touch Tangible user interface 3D user interfaces Augmented and virtual reality 3D interaction Finger tracking Positional tracking v t e Operating systems General Advocacy Comparison Forensic engineering History Hobbyist development List Timeline Usage share Variants Disk operating system Distributed operating system Embedded operating system Mobile operating system Network operating system Object-oriented operating system Real-time operating system Supercomputer operating system Kernel Architectures Exokernel Hybrid Microkernel Monolithic vkernel Rump kernel Unikernel Components Device driver Loadable kernel module Microkernel User space Process management Concepts Computer multitasking (Cooperative, Preemptive) Context switch Interrupt IPC Process Process control block Real-time Thread Time-sharing Scheduling algorithms Fixed-priority preemptive Multilevel feedback queue Round-robin Shortest job next Memory management, resource protection Bus error General protection fault Memory protection Paging Protection ring Segmentation fault Virtual memory Storage access, file systems Boot loader Defragmentation Device file File attribute Inode Journal Partition Virtual file system Virtual tape library Supporting concepts API Computer network HAL Live CD Live USB OS shell CLI GUI 3D GUI NUI TUI VUI ZUI PXE Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zooming_user_interface&oldid=990839391" Categories: Graphical user interfaces Zoomable user interfaces Panorama viewers User interface techniques 3D GUIs Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Русский ไทย Українська Edit links This page was last edited on 26 November 2020, at 20:09 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement